I am forced into speech because men of science have refused to follow 
my advice without knowing why. It is altogether against my will that I
 tell my reasons for opposing this contemplated invasion of the antarc
tic‚Äîwith its vast fossil-hunt and its wholesale boring and melting o
f the ancient ice-cap‚Äîand I am the more reluctant because my warning
 may be in vain. Doubt of the real facts, as I must reveal them, is in
evitable; yet if I suppressed what will seem extravagant and incredibl
e there would be nothing left. The hitherto withheld photographs, both
 ordinary and a√´rial, will count in my favour; for they are damnably 
vivid and graphic. Still, they will be doubted because of the great le
ngths to which clever fakery can be carried. The ink drawings, of cour
se, will be jeered at as obvious impostures; notwithstanding a strange
ness of technique which art experts ought to remark and puzzle over. I
n the end I must rely on the judgment and standing of the few scientif
ic leaders who have, on the one hand, sufficient independence of thoug
ht to weigh my data on its own hideously convincing merits or in the l
ight of certain primordial and highly baffling myth-cycles; and on the
 other hand, sufficient influence to deter the exploring world in gene
ral from any rash and overambitious programme in the region of those m
ountains of madness. It is an unfortunate fact that relatively obscure
 men like myself and my associates, connected only with a small univer
sity, have little chance of making an impression where matters of a wi
ldly bizarre or highly controversial nature are concerned. It is furth
er against us that we are not, in the strictest sense, specialists in 
the fields which came primarily to be concerned. As a geologist my obj
ect in leading the Miskatonic University Expedition was wholly that of
 securing deep-level specimens of rock and soil from various parts of 
the antarctic continent, aided by the remarkable drill devised by Prof
. Frank H. Pabodie of our engineering department. I had no wish to be 
a pioneer in any other field than this; but I did hope that the use of
 this new mechanical appliance at different points along previously ex
plored paths would bring to light materials of a sort hitherto unreach
ed by the ordinary methods of collection. Pabodie‚Äôs drilling apparat
us, as the public already knows from our reports, was unique and radic
al in its lightness, portability, and capacity to combine the ordinary
 artesian drill principle with the principle of the small circular roc
k drill in such a way as to cope quickly with strata of varying hardne
ss. Steel head, jointed rods, gasoline motor, collapsible wooden derri
ck, dynamiting paraphernalia, cording, rubbish-removal auger, and sect
ional piping for bores five inches wide and up to 1000 feet deep all f
ormed, with needed accessories, no greater load than three seven-dog s
ledges could carry; this being made possible by the clever aluminum al
loy of which most of the metal objects were fashioned. Four large Dorn
ier a√´roplanes, designed especially for the tremendous altitude flyin
g necessary on the antarctic plateau and with added fuel-warming and q
uick-starting devices worked out by Pabodie, could transport our entir
e expedition from a base at the edge of the great ice barrier to vario
us suitable inland points, and from these points a sufficient quota of
 dogs would serve us. We planned to cover as great an area as one anta
rctic season‚Äîor longer, if absolutely necessary‚Äîwould permit, oper
ating mostly in the mountain-ranges and on the plateau south of Ross S
ea; regions explored in varying degree by Shackleton, Amundsen, Scott,
 and Byrd. With frequent changes of camp, made by a√´roplane and invol
ving distances great enough to be of geological significance, we expec
ted to unearth a quite unprecedented amount of material; especially in
 the pre-Cambrian strata of which so narrow a range of antarctic speci
mens had previously been secured. We wished also to obtain as great as
 possible a variety of the upper fossiliferous rocks, since the primal
 life-history of this bleak realm of ice and death is of the highest i
mportance to our knowledge of the earth‚Äôs past. That the antarctic c
ontinent was once temperate and even tropical, with a teeming vegetabl
e and animal life of which the lichens, marine fauna, arachnida, and p
enguins of the northern edge are the only survivals, is a matter of co
mmon information; and we hoped to expand that information in variety, 
accuracy, and detail. When a simple boring revealed fossiliferous sign
s, we would enlarge the aperture by blasting in order to get specimens
 of suitable size and condition. Our borings, of varying depth accordi
ng to the promise held out by the upper soil or rock, were to be confi
ned to exposed or nearly exposed land surfaces‚Äîthese inevitably bein
g slopes and ridges because of the mile or two-mile thickness of solid
 ice overlying the lower levels. We could not afford to waste drilling
 depth on any considerable amount of mere glaciation, though Pabodie h
ad worked out a plan for sinking copper electrodes in thick clusters o
f borings and melting off limited areas of ice with current from a gas
oline-driven dynamo. It is this plan‚Äîwhich we could not put into eff
ect except experimentally on an expedition such as ours‚Äîthat the com
ing Starkweather-Moore Expedition proposes to follow despite the warni
ngs I have issued since our return from the antarctic. The public know
s of the Miskatonic Expedition through our frequent wireless reports t
o the Arkham Advertiser and Associated Press, and through the later ar
ticles of Pabodie and myself. We consisted of four men from the Univer
sity‚ÄîPabodie, Lake of the biology department, Atwood of the physics 
department (also a meteorologist), and I representing geology and havi
ng nominal command‚Äîbesides sixteen assistants; seven graduate studen
ts from Miskatonic and nine skilled mechanics. Of these sixteen, twelv
e were qualified a√´roplane pilots, all but two of whom were competent
 wireless operators. Eight of them understood navigation with compass 
and sextant, as did Pabodie, Atwood, and I. In addition, of course, ou
r two ships‚Äîwooden ex-whalers, reinforced for ice conditions and hav
ing auxiliary steam‚Äîwere fully manned. The Nathaniel Derby Pickman F
oundation, aided by a few special contributions, financed the expediti
on; hence our preparations were extremely thorough despite the absence
 of great publicity. The dogs, sledges, machines, camp materials, and 
unassembled parts of our five planes were delivered in Boston, and the
re our ships were loaded. We were marvellously well-equipped for our s
pecific purposes, and in all matters pertaining to supplies, regimen, 
transportation, and camp construction we profited by the excellent exa
mple of our many recent and exceptionally brilliant predecessors. It w
as the unusual number and fame of these predecessors which made our ow
n expedition‚Äîample though it was‚Äîso little noticed by the world at
 large. As the newspapers told, we sailed from Boston Harbour on Septe
mber 2, 1930; taking a leisurely course down the coast and through the
 Panama Canal, and stopping at Samoa and Hobart, Tasmania, at which la
tter place we took on final supplies. None of our exploring party had 
ever been in the polar regions before, hence we all relied greatly on 
our ship captains‚ÄîJ. B. Douglas, commanding the brig Arkham, and ser
ving as commander of the sea party, and Georg Thorfinnssen, commanding
 the barque Miskatonic‚Äîboth veteran whalers in antarctic waters. As 
we left the inhabited world behind the sun sank lower and lower in the
 north, and stayed longer and longer above the horizon each day. At ab
out 62¬∞ South Latitude we sighted our first icebergs‚Äîtable-like obj
ects with vertical sides‚Äîand just before reaching the Antarctic Circ
le, which we crossed on October 20 with appropriately quaint ceremonie
s, we were considerably troubled with field ice. The falling temperatu
re bothered me considerably after our long voyage through the tropics,
 but I tried to brace up for the worse rigours to come. On many occasi
ons the curious atmospheric effects enchanted me vastly; these includi
ng a strikingly vivid mirage‚Äîthe first I had ever seen‚Äîin which di
stant bergs became the battlements of unimaginable cosmic castles. Pus
hing through the ice, which was fortunately neither extensive nor thic
kly packed, we regained open water at South Latitude 67¬∞, East Longit
ude 175¬∞. On the morning of October 26 a strong ‚Äúland blink‚Äù appe
ared on the south, and before noon we all felt a thrill of excitement 
at beholding a vast, lofty, and snow-clad mountain chain which opened 
out and covered the whole vista ahead. At last we had encountered an o
utpost of the great unknown continent and its cryptic world of frozen 
death. These peaks were obviously the Admiralty Range discovered by Ro
ss, and it would now be our task to round Cape Adare and sail down the
 east coast of Victoria Land to our contemplated base on the shore of 
McMurdo Sound at the foot of the volcano Erebus in South Latitude 77¬∞
 9‚Ä≤. The last lap of the voyage was vivid and fancy-stirring, great 
barren peaks of mystery looming up constantly against the west as the 
low northern sun of noon or the still lower horizon-grazing southern s
un of midnight poured its hazy reddish rays over the white snow, bluis
h ice and water lanes, and black bits of exposed granite slope. Throug
h the desolate summits swept raging intermittent gusts of the terrible
 antarctic wind; whose cadences sometimes held vague suggestions of a 
wild and half-sentient musical piping, with notes extending over a wid
e range, and which for some subconscious mnemonic reason seemed to me 
disquieting and even dimly terrible. Something about the scene reminde
d me of the strange and disturbing Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich
, and of the still stranger and more disturbing descriptions of the ev
illy fabled plateau of Leng which occur in the dreaded Necronomicon of
 the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred. I was rather sorry, later on, that I had
 ever looked into that monstrous book at the college library. On the s
eventh of November, sight of the westward range having been temporaril
y lost, we passed Franklin Island; and the next day descried the cones
 of Mts. Erebus and Terror on Ross Island ahead, with the long line of
 the Parry Mountains beyond. There now stretched off to the east the l
ow, white line of the great ice barrier; rising perpendicularly to a h
eight of 200 feet like the rocky cliffs of Quebec, and marking the end
 of southward navigation. In the afternoon we entered McMurdo Sound an
d stood off the coast in the lee of smoking Mt. Erebus. The scoriac pe
ak towered up some 12,700 feet against the eastern sky, like a Japanes
e print of the sacred Fujiyama; while beyond it rose the white, ghost-
like height of Mt. Terror, 10,900 feet in altitude, and now extinct as
 a volcano. Puffs of smoke from Erebus came intermittently, and one of
 the graduate assistants‚Äîa brilliant young fellow named Danforth‚Äîp
ointed out what looked like lava on the snowy slope; remarking that th
is mountain, discovered in 1840, had undoubtedly been the source of Po
e‚Äôs image when he wrote seven years later of ‚Äú‚Äîthe lavas that re
stlessly roll Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek In the ultimate cl
imes of the pole‚Äî That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek In the r
ealms of the boreal pole.‚Äù Danforth was a great reader of bizarre ma
terial, and had talked a good deal of Poe. I was interested myself bec
ause of the antarctic scene of Poe‚Äôs only long story‚Äîthe disturbin
g and enigmatical Arthur Gordon Pym. On the barren shore, and on the l
ofty ice barrier in the background, myriads of grotesque penguins squa
wked and flapped their fins; while many fat seals were visible on the 
water, swimming or sprawling across large cakes of slowly drifting ice
. Using small boats, we effected a difficult landing on Ross Island sh
ortly after midnight on the morning of the 9th, carrying a line of cab
le from each of the ships and preparing to unload supplies by means of
 a breeches-buoy arrangement. Our sensations on first treading antarct
ic soil were poignant and complex, even though at this particular poin
t the Scott and Shackleton expeditions had preceded us. Our camp on th
e frozen shore below the volcano‚Äôs slope was only a provisional one;
 headquarters being kept aboard the Arkham. We landed all our drilling
 apparatus, dogs, sledges, tents, provisions, gasoline tanks, experime
ntal ice-melting outfit, cameras both ordinary and a√´rial, a√´roplane
 parts, and other accessories, including three small portable wireless
 outfits (besides those in the planes) capable of communicating with t
he Arkham‚Äôs large outfit from any part of the antarctic continent th
at we would be likely to visit. The ship‚Äôs outfit, communicating wit
h the outside world, was to convey press reports to the Arkham Adverti
ser‚Äôs powerful wireless station on Kingsport Head, Mass. We hoped to
 complete our work during a single antarctic summer; but if this prove
d impossible we would winter on the Arkham, sending the Miskatonic nor
th before the freezing of the ice for another summer‚Äôs supplies. I n
eed not repeat what the newspapers have already published about our ea
rly work: of our ascent of Mt. Erebus; our successful mineral borings 
at several points on Ross Island and the singular speed with which Pab
odie‚Äôs apparatus accomplished them, even through solid rock layers; 
our provisional test of the small ice-melting equipment; our perilous 
ascent of the great barrier with sledges and supplies; and our final a
ssembling of five huge a√´roplanes at the camp atop the barrier. The h
ealth of our land party‚Äîtwenty men and 55 Alaskan sledge dogs‚Äîwas 
remarkable, though of course we had so far encountered no really destr
uctive temperatures or windstorms. For the most part, the thermometer 
varied between zero and 20¬∞ or 25¬∞ above, and our experience with Ne
w England winters had accustomed us to rigours of this sort. The barri
er camp was semi-permanent, and destined to be a storage cache for gas
oline, provisions, dynamite, and other supplies. Only four of our plan
es were needed to carry the actual exploring material, the fifth being
 left with a pilot and two men from the ships at the storage cache to 
form a means of reaching us from the Arkham in case all our exploring 
planes were lost. Later, when not using all the other planes for movin
g apparatus, we would employ one or two in a shuttle transportation se
rvice between this cache and another permanent base on the great plate
au from 600 to 700 miles southward, beyond Beardmore Glacier. Despite 
the almost unanimous accounts of appalling winds and tempests that pou
r down from the plateau, we determined to dispense with intermediate b
ases; taking our chances in the interest of economy and probable effic
iency. Wireless reports have spoken of the breath-taking four-hour non
-stop flight of our squadron on November 21 over the lofty shelf ice, 
with vast peaks rising on the west, and the unfathomed silences echoin
g to the sound of our engines. Wind troubled us only moderately, and o
ur radio compasses helped us through the one opaque fog we encountered
. When the vast rise loomed ahead, between Latitudes 83¬∞ and 84¬∞, we
 knew we had reached Beardmore Glacier, the largest valley glacier in 
the world, and that the frozen sea was now giving place to a frowning 
and mountainous coastline. At last we were truly entering the white, a
eon-dead world of the ultimate south, and even as we realised it we sa
w the peak of Mt. Nansen in the eastern distance, towering up to its h
eight of almost 15,000 feet. The successful establishment of the south
ern base above the glacier in Latitude 86¬∞ 7‚Ä≤, East Longitude 174¬∞
 23‚Ä≤, and the phenomenally rapid and effective borings and blastings
 made at various points reached by our sledge trips and short a√´ropla
ne flights, are matters of history; as is the arduous and triumphant a
scent of Mt. Nansen by Pabodie and two of the graduate students‚ÄîGedn
ey and Carroll‚Äîon December 13‚Äì15. We were some 8500 feet above sea
-level, and when experimental drillings revealed solid ground only twe
lve feet down through the snow and ice at certain points, we made cons
iderable use of the small melting apparatus and sunk bores and perform
ed dynamiting at many places where no previous explorer had ever thoug
ht of securing mineral specimens. The pre-Cambrian granites and beacon
 sandstones thus obtained confirmed our belief that this plateau was h
omogeneous with the great bulk of the continent to the west, but somew
hat different from the parts lying eastward below South America‚Äîwhic
h we then thought to form a separate and smaller continent divided fro
m the larger one by a frozen junction of Ross and Weddell Seas, though
 Byrd has since disproved the hypothesis. In certain of the sandstones
, dynamited and chiselled after boring revealed their nature, we found
 some highly interesting fossil markings and fragments‚Äînotably ferns
, seaweeds, trilobites, crinoids, and such molluscs as lingulae and ga
steropods‚Äîall of which seemed of real significance in connexion with
 the region‚Äôs primordial history. There was also a queer triangular,
 striated marking about a foot in greatest diameter which Lake pieced 
together from three fragments of slate brought up from a deep-blasted 
aperture. These fragments came from a point to the westward, near the 
Queen Alexandra Range; and Lake, as a biologist, seemed to find their 
curious marking unusually puzzling and provocative, though to my geolo
gical eye it looked not unlike some of the ripple effects reasonably c
ommon in the sedimentary rocks. Since slate is no more than a metamorp
hic formation into which a sedimentary stratum is pressed, and since t
he pressure itself produces odd distorting effects on any markings whi
ch may exist, I saw no reason for extreme wonder over the striated dep
ression. On January 6, 1931, Lake, Pabodie, Danforth, all six of the s
tudents, four mechanics, and I flew directly over the south pole in tw
o of the great planes, being forced down once by a sudden high wind wh
ich fortunately did not develop into a typical storm. This was, as the
 papers have stated, one of several observation flights; during others
 of which we tried to discern new topographical features in areas unre
ached by previous explorers. Our early flights were disappointing in t
his latter respect; though they afforded us some magnificent examples 
of the richly fantastic and deceptive mirages of the polar regions, of
 which our sea voyage had given us some brief foretastes. Distant moun
tains floated in the sky as enchanted cities, and often the whole whit
e world would dissolve into a gold, silver, and scarlet land of Dunsan
ian dreams and adventurous expectancy under the magic of the low midni
ght sun. On cloudy days we had considerable trouble in flying, owing t
o the tendency of snowy earth and sky to merge into one mystical opale
scent void with no visible horizon to mark the junction of the two. At
 length we resolved to carry out our original plan of flying 500 miles
 eastward with all four exploring planes and establishing a fresh sub-
base at a point which would probably be on the smaller continental div
ision, as we mistakenly conceived it. Geological specimens obtained th
ere would be desirable for purposes of comparison. Our health so far h
ad remained excellent; lime-juice well offsetting the steady diet of t
inned and salted food, and temperatures generally above zero enabling 
us to do without our thickest furs. It was now midsummer, and with has
te and care we might be able to conclude work by March and avoid a ted
ious wintering through the long antarctic night. Several savage windst
orms had burst upon us from the west, but we had escaped damage throug
h the skill of Atwood in devising rudimentary a√´roplane shelters and 
windbreaks of heavy snow blocks, and reinforcing the principal camp bu
ildings with snow. Our good luck and efficiency had indeed been almost
 uncanny. The outside world knew, of course, of our programme, and was
 told also of Lake‚Äôs strange and dogged insistence on a westward‚Äîo
r rather, northwestward‚Äîprospecting trip before our radical shift to
 the new base. It seems he had pondered a great deal, and with alarmin
gly radical daring, over that triangular striated marking in the slate
; reading into it certain contradictions in Nature and geological peri
od which whetted his curiosity to the utmost, and made him avid to sin
k more borings and blastings in the west-stretching formation to which
 the exhumed fragments evidently belonged. He was strangely convinced 
that the marking was the print of some bulky, unknown, and radically u
nclassifiable organism of considerably advanced evolution, notwithstan
ding that the rock which bore it was of so vastly ancient a date‚ÄîCam
brian if not actually pre-Cambrian‚Äîas to preclude the probable exist
ence not only of all highly evolved life, but of any life at all above
 the unicellular or at most the trilobite stage. These fragments, with
 their odd marking, must have been 500 million to a thousand million y
ears old. II. Popular imagination, I judge, responded actively to our 
wireless bulletins of Lake‚Äôs start northwestward into regions never 
trodden by human foot or penetrated by human imagination; though we di
d not mention his wild hopes of revolutionising the entire sciences of
 biology and geology. His preliminary sledging and boring journey of J
anuary 11‚Äì18 with Pabodie and five others‚Äîmarred by the loss of tw
o dogs in an upset when crossing one of the great pressure-ridges in t
he ice‚Äîhad brought up more and more of the Archaean slate; and even 
I was interested by the singular profusion of evident fossil markings 
in that unbelievably ancient stratum. These markings, however, were of
 very primitive life-forms involving no great paradox except that any 
life-forms should occur in rock as definitely pre-Cambrian as this see
med to be; hence I still failed to see the good sense of Lake‚Äôs dema
nd for an interlude in our time-saving programme‚Äîan interlude requir
ing the use of all four planes, many men, and the whole of the expedit
ion‚Äôs mechanical apparatus. I did not, in the end, veto the plan; th
ough I decided not to accompany the northwestward party despite Lake‚Ä
ôs plea for my geological advice. While they were gone, I would remain
 at the base with Pabodie and five men and work out final plans for th
e eastward shift. In preparation for this transfer one of the planes h
ad begun to move up a good gasoline supply from McMurdo Sound; but thi
s could wait temporarily. I kept with me one sledge and nine dogs, sin
ce it is unwise to be at any time without possible transportation in a
n utterly tenantless world of aeon-long death. Lake‚Äôs sub-expedition
 into the unknown, as everyone will recall, sent out its own reports f
rom the short-wave transmitters on the planes; these being simultaneou
sly picked up by our apparatus at the southern base and by the Arkham 
at McMurdo Sound, whence they were relayed to the outside world on wav
e-lengths up to fifty metres. The start was made January 22 at 4 A.M.;
 and the first wireless message we received came only two hours later,
 when Lake spoke of descending and starting a small-scale ice-melting 
and bore at a point some 300 miles away from us. Six hours after that 
a second and very excited message told of the frantic, beaver-like wor
k whereby a shallow shaft had been sunk and blasted; culminating in th
e discovery of slate fragments with several markings approximately lik
e the one which had caused the original puzzlement. Three hours later 
a brief bulletin announced the resumption of the flight in the teeth o
f a raw and piercing gale; and when I despatched a message of protest 
against further hazards, Lake replied curtly that his new specimens ma
de any hazard worth taking. I saw that his excitement had reached the 
point of mutiny, and that I could do nothing to check this headlong ri
sk of the whole expedition‚Äôs success; but it was appalling to think 
of his plunging deeper and deeper into that treacherous and sinister w
hite immensity of tempests and unfathomed mysteries which stretched of
f for some 1500 miles to the half-known, half-suspected coast-line of 
Queen Mary and Knox Lands. Then, in about an hour and a half more, cam
e that doubly excited message from Lake‚Äôs moving plane which almost 
reversed my sentiments and made me wish I had accompanied the party. ‚
Äú10:05 P.M. On the wing. After snowstorm, have spied mountain-range a
head higher than any hitherto seen. May equal Himalayas allowing for h
eight of plateau. Probable Latitude 76¬∞ 15‚Ä≤, Longitude 113¬∞ 10‚Ä≤ 
E. Reaches far as can see to right and left. Suspicion of two smoking 
cones. All peaks black and bare of snow. Gale blowing off them impedes
 navigation.‚Äù After that Pabodie, the men, and I hung breathlessly o
ver the receiver. Thought of this titanic mountain rampart 700 miles a
way inflamed our deepest sense of adventure; and we rejoiced that our 
expedition, if not ourselves personally, had been its discoverers. In 
half an hour Lake called us again. ‚ÄúMoulton‚Äôs plane forced down on
 plateau in foothills, but nobody hurt and perhaps can repair. Shall t
ransfer essentials to other three for return or further moves if neces
sary, but no more heavy plane travel needed just now. Mountains surpas
s anything in imagination. Am going up scouting in Carroll‚Äôs plane, 
with all weight out. You can‚Äôt imagine anything like this. Highest p
eaks must go over 35,000 feet. Everest out of the running. Atwood to w
ork out height with theodolite while Carroll and I go up. Probably wro
ng about cones, for formations look stratified. Possibly pre-Cambrian 
slate with other strata mixed in. Queer skyline effects‚Äîregular sect
ions of cubes clinging to highest peaks. Whole thing marvellous in red
-gold light of low sun. Like land of mystery in a dream or gateway to 
forbidden world of untrodden wonder. Wish you were here to study.‚Äù T
hough it was technically sleeping-time, not one of us listeners though
t for a moment of retiring. It must have been a good deal the same at 
McMurdo Sound, where the supply cache and the Arkham were also getting
 the messages; for Capt. Douglas gave out a call congratulating everyb
ody on the important find, and Sherman, the cache operator, seconded h
is sentiments. We were sorry, of course, about the damaged a√´roplane;
 but hoped it could be easily mended. Then, at 11 P.M., came another c
all from Lake. ‚ÄúUp with Carroll over highest foothills. Don‚Äôt dare
 try really tall peaks in present weather, but shall later. Frightful 
work climbing, and hard going at this altitude, but worth it. Great ra
nge fairly solid, hence can‚Äôt get any glimpses beyond. Main summits 
exceed Himalayas, and very queer. Range looks like pre-Cambrian slate,
 with plain signs of many other upheaved strata. Was wrong about volca
nism. Goes farther in either direction than we can see. Swept clear of
 snow above about 21,000 feet. Odd formations on slopes of highest mou
ntains. Great low square blocks with exactly vertical sides, and recta
ngular lines of low vertical ramparts, like the old Asian castles clin
ging to steep mountains in Roerich‚Äôs paintings. Impressive from dist
ance. Flew close to some, and Carroll thought they were formed of smal
ler separate pieces, but that is probably weathering. Most edges crumb
led and rounded off as if exposed to storms and climate changes for mi
llions of years. Parts, especially upper parts, seem to be of lighter-
coloured rock than any visible strata on slopes proper, hence an evide
ntly crystalline origin. Close flying shews many cave-mouths, some unu
sually regular in outline, square or semicircular. You must come and i
nvestigate. Think I saw rampart squarely on top of one peak. Height se
ems about 30,000 to 35,000 feet. Am up 21,500 myself, in devilish gnaw
ing cold. Wind whistles and pipes through passes and in and out of cav
es, but no flying danger so far.‚Äù From then on for another half-hour
 Lake kept up a running fire of comment, and expressed his intention o
f climbing some of the peaks on foot. I replied that I would join him 
as soon as he could send a plane, and that Pabodie and I would work ou
t the best gasoline plan‚Äîjust where and how to concentrate our suppl
y in view of the expedition‚Äôs altered character. Obviously, Lake‚Äôs
 boring operations, as well as his a√´roplane activities, would need a
 great deal delivered for the new base which he was to establish at th
e foot of the mountains; and it was possible that the eastward flight 
might not be made after all this season. In connexion with this busine
ss I called Capt. Douglas and asked him to get as much as possible out
 of the ships and up the barrier with the single dog-team we had left 
there. A direct route across the unknown region between Lake and McMur
do Sound was what we really ought to establish. Lake called me later t
o say that he had decided to let the camp stay where Moulton‚Äôs plane
 had been forced down, and where repairs had already progressed somewh
at. The ice-sheet was very thin, with dark ground here and there visib
le, and he would sink some borings and blasts at that very point befor
e making any sledge trips or climbing expeditions. He spoke of the ine
ffable majesty of the whole scene, and the queer state of his sensatio
ns at being in the lee of vast silent pinnacles whose ranks shot up li
ke a wall reaching the sky at the world‚Äôs rim. Atwood‚Äôs theodolite
 observations had placed the height of the five tallest peaks at from 
30,000 to 34,000 feet. The windswept nature of the terrain clearly dis
turbed Lake, for it argued the occasional existence of prodigious gale
s violent beyond anything we had so far encountered. His camp lay a li
ttle more than five miles from where the higher foothills abruptly ros
e. I could almost trace a note of subconscious alarm in his words‚Äîfl
ashed across a glacial void of 700 miles‚Äîas he urged that we all has
ten with the matter and get the strange new region disposed of as soon
 as possible. He was about to rest now, after a continuous day‚Äôs wor
k of almost unparalleled speed, strenuousness, and results. In the mor
ning I had a three-cornered wireless talk with Lake and Capt. Douglas 
at their widely separated bases; and it was agreed that one of Lake‚Äô
s planes would come to my base for Pabodie, the five men, and myself, 
as well as for all the fuel it could carry. The rest of the fuel quest
ion, depending on our decision about an easterly trip, could wait for 
a few days; since Lake had enough for immediate camp heat and borings.
 Eventually the old southern base ought to be restocked; but if we pos
tponed the easterly trip we would not use it till the next summer, and
 meanwhile Lake must send a plane to explore a direct route between hi
s new mountains and McMurdo Sound. Pabodie and I prepared to close our
 base for a short or long period, as the case might be. If we wintered
 in the antarctic we would probably fly straight from Lake‚Äôs base to
 the Arkham without returning to this spot. Some of our conical tents 
had already been reinforced by blocks of hard snow, and now we decided
 to complete the job of making a permanent Esquimau village. Owing to 
a very liberal tent supply, Lake had with him all that his base would 
need even after our arrival. I wirelessed that Pabodie and I would be 
ready for the northwestward move after one day‚Äôs work and one night‚
Äôs rest. Our labours, however, were not very steady after 4 P.M.; for
 about that time Lake began sending in the most extraordinary and exci
ted messages. His working day had started unpropitiously; since an a√´
roplane survey of the nearly exposed rock surfaces shewed an entire ab
sence of those Archaean and primordial strata for which he was looking
, and which formed so great a part of the colossal peaks that loomed u
p at a tantalising distance from the camp. Most of the rocks glimpsed 
were apparently Jurassic and Comanchian sandstones and Permian and Tri
assic schists, with now and then a glossy black outcropping suggesting
 a hard and slaty coal. This rather discouraged Lake, whose plans all 
hinged on unearthing specimens more than 500 million years older. It w
as clear to him that in order to recover the Archaean slate vein in wh
ich he had found the odd markings, he would have to make a long sledge
 trip from these foothills to the steep slopes of the gigantic mountai
ns themselves. He had resolved, nevertheless, to do some local boring 
as part of the expedition‚Äôs general programme; hence set up the dril
l and put five men to work with it while the rest finished settling th
e camp and repairing the damaged a√´roplane. The softest visible rock‚
Äîa sandstone about a quarter of a mile from the camp‚Äîhad been chose
n for the first sampling; and the drill made excellent progress withou
t much supplementary blasting. It was about three hours afterward, fol
lowing the first really heavy blast of the operation, that the shoutin
g of the drill crew was heard; and that young Gedney‚Äîthe acting fore
man‚Äîrushed into the camp with the startling news. They had struck a 
cave. Early in the boring the sandstone had given place to a vein of C
omanchian limestone full of minute fossil cephalopods, corals, echini,
 and spirifera, and with occasional suggestions of siliceous sponges a
nd marine vertebrate bones‚Äîthe latter probably of teliosts, sharks, 
and ganoids. This in itself was important enough, as affording the fir
st vertebrate fossils the expedition had yet secured; but when shortly
 afterward the drill-head dropped through the stratum into apparent va
cancy, a wholly new and doubly intense wave of excitement spread among
 the excavators. A good-sized blast had laid open the subterrene secre
t; and now, through a jagged aperture perhaps five feet across and thr
ee feet thick, there yawned before the avid searchers a section of sha
llow limestone hollowing worn more than fifty million years ago by the
 trickling ground waters of a bygone tropic world. The hollowed layer 
was not more than seven or eight feet deep, but extended off indefinit
ely in all directions and had a fresh, slightly moving air which sugge
sted its membership in an extensive subterranean system. Its roof and 
floor were abundantly equipped with large stalactites and stalagmites,
 some of which met in columnar form; but important above all else was 
the vast deposit of shells and bones which in places nearly choked the
 passage. Washed down from unknown jungles of Mesozoic tree-ferns and 
fungi, and forests of Tertiary cycads, fan-palms, and primitive angios
perms, this osseous medley contained representatives of more Cretaceou
s, Eocene, and other animal species than the greatest palaeontologist 
could have counted or classified in a year. Molluscs, crustacean armou
r, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and early mammals‚Äîgreat and 
small, known and unknown. No wonder Gedney ran back to the camp shouti
ng, and no wonder everyone else dropped work and rushed headlong throu
gh the biting cold to where the tall derrick marked a new-found gatewa
y to secrets of inner earth and vanished aeons. When Lake had satisfie
d the first keen edge of his curiosity he scribbled a message in his n
otebook and had young Moulton run back to the camp to despatch it by w
ireless. This was my first word of the discovery, and it told of the i
dentification of early shells, bones of ganoids and placoderms, remnan
ts of labyrinthodonts and thecodonts, great mososaur skull fragments, 
dinosaur vertebrae and armour-plates, pterodactyl teeth and wing-bones
, archaeopteryx debris, Miocene sharks‚Äô teeth, primitive bird-skulls
, and skulls, vertebrae, and other bones of archaic mammals such as pa
laeotheres, xiphodons, dinocerases, eohippi, oreodons, and titanothere
s. There was nothing as recent as a mastodon, elephant, true camel, de
er, or bovine animal; hence Lake concluded that the last deposits had 
occurred during the Oligocene age, and that the hollowed stratum had l
ain in its present dried, dead, and inaccessible state for at least th
irty million years. On the other hand, the prevalence of very early li
fe-forms was singular in the highest degree. Though the limestone form
ation was, on the evidence of such typical imbedded fossils as ventric
ulites, positively and unmistakably Comanchian and not a particle earl
ier; the free fragments in the hollow space included a surprising prop
ortion from organisms hitherto considered as peculiar to far older per
iods‚Äîeven rudimentary fishes, molluscs, and corals as remote as the 
Silurian or Ordovician. The inevitable inference was that in this part
 of the world there had been a remarkable and unique degree of continu
ity between the life of over 300 million years ago and that of only th
irty million years ago. How far this continuity had extended beyond th
e Oligocene age when the cavern was closed, was of course past all spe
culation. In any event, the coming of the frightful ice in the Pleisto
cene some 500,000 years ago‚Äîa mere yesterday as compared with the ag
e of this cavity‚Äîmust have put an end to any of the primal forms whi
ch had locally managed to outlive their common terms. Lake was not con
tent to let his first message stand, but had another bulletin written 
and despatched across the snow to the camp before Moulton could get ba
ck. After that Moulton stayed at the wireless in one of the planes; tr
ansmitting to me‚Äîand to the Arkham for relaying to the outside world
‚Äîthe frequent postscripts which Lake sent him by a succession of mes
sengers. Those who followed the newspapers will remember the excitemen
t created among men of science by that afternoon‚Äôs reports‚Äîreports
 which have finally led, after all these years, to the organisation of
 that very Starkweather-Moore Expedition which I am so anxious to diss
uade from its purposes. I had better give the messages literally as La
ke sent them, and as our base operator McTighe translated them from hi
s pencil shorthand. ‚ÄúFowler makes discovery of highest importance in
 sandstone and limestone fragments from blasts. Several distinct trian
gular striated prints like those in Archaean slate, proving that sourc
e survived from over 600 million years ago to Comanchian times without
 more than moderate morphological changes and decrease in average size
. Comanchian prints apparently more primitive or decadent, if anything
, than older ones. Emphasise importance of discovery in press. Will me
an to biology what Einstein has meant to mathematics and physics. Join
s up with my previous work and amplifies conclusions. Appears to indic
ate, as I suspected, that earth has seen whole cycle or cycles of orga
nic life before known one that begins with Archaeozoic cells. Was evol
ved and specialised not later than thousand million years ago, when pl
anet was young and recently uninhabitable for any life-forms or normal
 protoplasmic structure. Question arises when, where, and how developm
ent took place.‚Äù ‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî ‚ÄúLater. Examining certai
n skeletal fragments of large land and marine saurians and primitive m
ammals, find singular local wounds or injuries to bony structure not a
ttributable to any known predatory or carnivorous animal of any period
. Of two sorts‚Äîstraight, penetrant bores, and apparently hacking inc
isions. One or two cases of cleanly severed bone. Not many specimens a
ffected. Am sending to camp for electric torches. Will extend search a
rea underground by hacking away stalactites.‚Äù ‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚
Äî ‚ÄúStill later. Have found peculiar soapstone fragment about six in
ches across and an inch and a half thick, wholly unlike any visible lo
cal formation. Greenish, but no evidences to place its period. Has cur
ious smoothness and regularity. Shaped like five-pointed star with tip
s broken off, and signs of other cleavage at inward angles and in cent
re of surface. Small, smooth depression in centre of unbroken surface.
 Arouses much curiosity as to source and weathering. Probably some fre
ak of water action. Carroll, with magnifier, thinks he can make out ad
ditional markings of geologic significance. Groups of tiny dots in reg
ular patterns. Dogs growing uneasy as we work, and seem to hate this s
oapstone. Must see if it has any peculiar odour. Will report again whe
n Mills gets back with light and we start on underground area.‚Äù ‚Äî‚
Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî ‚Äú10:15 P.M. Important discovery. Orrendorf and 
Watkins, working underground at 9:45 with light, found monstrous barre
l-shaped fossil of wholly unknown nature; probably vegetable unless ov
ergrown specimen of unknown marine radiata. Tissue evidently preserved
 by mineral salts. Tough as leather, but astonishing flexibility retai
ned in places. Marks of broken-off parts at ends and around sides. Six
 feet end to end, 3.5 feet central diameter, tapering to 1 foot at eac
h end. Like a barrel with five bulging ridges in place of staves. Late
ral breakages, as of thinnish stalks, are at equator in middle of thes
e ridges. In furrows between ridges are curious growths. Combs or wing
s that fold up and spread out like fans. All greatly damaged but one, 
which gives almost seven-foot wing spread. Arrangement reminds one of 
certain monsters of primal myth, especially fabled Elder Things in Nec
ronomicon. These wings seem to be membraneous, stretched on framework 
of glandular tubing. Apparent minute orifices in frame tubing at wing 
tips. Ends of body shrivelled, giving no clue to interior or to what h
as been broken off there. Must dissect when we get back to camp. Can‚Ä
ôt decide whether vegetable or animal. Many features obviously of almo
st incredible primitiveness. Have set all hands cutting stalactites an
d looking for further specimens. Additional scarred bones found, but t
hese must wait. Having trouble with dogs. They can‚Äôt endure the new 
specimen, and would probably tear it to pieces if we didn‚Äôt keep it 
at a distance from them.‚Äù ‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî ‚Äú11:30 P.M. Att
ention, Dyer, Pabodie, Douglas. Matter of highest‚ÄîI might say transc
endent‚Äîimportance. Arkham must relay to Kingsport Head Station at on
ce. Strange barrel growth is the Archaean thing that left prints in ro
cks. Mills, Boudreau, and Fowler discover cluster of thirteen more at 
underground point forty feet from aperture. Mixed with curiously round
ed and configured soapstone fragments smaller than one previously foun
d‚Äîstar-shaped but no marks of breakage except at some of the points.
 Of organic specimens, eight apparently perfect, with all appendages. 
Have brought all to surface, leading off dogs to distance. They cannot
 stand the things. Give close attention to description and repeat back
 for accuracy. Papers must get this right. ‚ÄúObjects are eight feet l
ong all over. Six-foot five-ridged barrel torso 3.5 feet central diame
ter, 1 foot end diameters. Dark grey, flexible, and infinitely tough. 
Seven-foot membraneous wings of same colour, found folded, spread out 
of furrows between ridges. Wing framework tubular or glandular, of lig
hter grey, with orifices at wing tips. Spread wings have serrated edge
. Around equator, one at central apex of each of the five vertical, st
ave-like ridges, are five systems of light grey flexible arms or tenta
cles found tightly folded to torso but expansible to maximum length of
 over 3 feet. Like arms of primitive crinoid. Single stalks 3 inches d
iameter branch after 6 inches into five sub-stalks, each of which bran
ches after 8 inches into five small, tapering tentacles or tendrils, g
iving each stalk a total of 25 tentacles. ‚ÄúAt top of torso blunt bul
bous neck of lighter grey with gill-like suggestions holds yellowish f
ive-pointed starfish-shaped apparent head covered with three-inch wiry
 cilia of various prismatic colours. Head thick and puffy, about 2 fee
t point to point, with three-inch flexible yellowish tubes projecting 
from each point. Slit in exact centre of top probably breathing apertu
re. At end of each tube is spherical expansion where yellowish membran
e rolls back on handling to reveal glassy, red-irised globe, evidently
 an eye. Five slightly longer reddish tubes start from inner angles of
 starfish-shaped head and end in sac-like swellings of same colour whi
ch upon pressure open to bell-shaped orifices 2 inches maximum diamete
r and lined with sharp white tooth-like projections. Probable mouths. 
All these tubes, cilia, and points of starfish-head found folded tight
ly down; tubes and points clinging to bulbous neck and torso. Flexibil
ity surprising despite vast toughness. ‚ÄúAt bottom of torso rough but
 dissimilarly functioning counterparts of head arrangements exist. Bul
bous light-grey pseudo-neck, without gill suggestions, holds greenish 
five-pointed starfish-arrangement. Tough, muscular arms 4 feet long an
d tapering from 7 inches diameter at base to about 2.5 at point. To ea
ch point is attached small end of a greenish five-veined membraneous t
riangle 8 inches long and 6 wide at farther end. This is the paddle, f
in, or pseudo-foot which has made prints in rocks from a thousand mill
ion to fifty or sixty million years old. From inner angles of starfish
-arrangement project two-foot reddish tubes tapering from 3 inches dia
meter at base to 1 at tip. Orifices at tips. All these parts infinitel
y tough and leathery, but extremely flexible. Four-foot arms with padd
les undoubtedly used for locomotion of some sort, marine or otherwise.
 When moved, display suggestions of exaggerated muscularity. As found,
 all these projections tightly folded over pseudo-neck and end of tors
o, corresponding to projections at other end. ‚ÄúCannot yet assign pos
itively to animal or vegetable kingdom, but odds now favour animal. Pr
obably represents incredibly advanced evolution of radiata without los
s of certain primitive features. Echinoderm resemblances unmistakable 
despite local contradictory evidences. Wing structure puzzles in view 
of probable marine habitat, but may have use in water navigation. Symm
etry is curiously vegetable-like, suggesting vegetable‚Äôs essentially
 up-and-down structure rather than animal‚Äôs fore-and-aft structure. 
Fabulously early date of evolution, preceding even simplest Archaean p
rotozoa hitherto known, baffles all conjecture as to origin. ‚ÄúComple
te specimens have such uncanny resemblance to certain creatures of pri
mal myth that suggestion of ancient existence outside antarctic become
s inevitable. Dyer and Pabodie have read Necronomicon and seen Clark A
shton Smith‚Äôs nightmare paintings based on text, and will understand
 when I speak of Elder Things supposed to have created all earth-life 
as jest or mistake. Students have always thought conception formed fro
m morbid imaginative treatment of very ancient tropical radiata. Also 
like prehistoric folklore things Wilmarth has spoken of‚ÄîCthulhu cult
 appendages, etc. ‚ÄúVast field of study opened. Deposits probably of 
late Cretaceous or early Eocene period, judging from associated specim
ens. Massive stalagmites deposited above them. Hard work hewing out, b
ut toughness prevented damage. State of preservation miraculous, evide
ntly owing to limestone action. No more found so far, but will resume 
search later. Job now to get fourteen huge specimens to camp without d
ogs, which bark furiously and can‚Äôt be trusted near them. With nine 
men‚Äîthree left to guard the dogs‚Äîwe ought to manage the three sled
ges fairly well, though wind is bad. Must establish plane communicatio
n with McMurdo Sound and begin shipping material. But I‚Äôve got to di
ssect one of these things before we take any rest. Wish I had a real l
aboratory here. Dyer better kick himself for having tried to stop my w
estward trip. First the world‚Äôs greatest mountains, and then this. I
f this last isn‚Äôt the high spot of the expedition, I don‚Äôt know wh
at is. We‚Äôre made scientifically. Congrats, Pabodie, on the drill th
at opened up the cave. Now will Arkham please repeat description?‚Äù T
he sensations of Pabodie and myself at receipt of this report were alm
ost beyond description, nor were our companions much behind us in enth
usiasm. McTighe, who had hastily translated a few high spots as they c
ame from the droning receiving set, wrote out the entire message from 
his shorthand version as soon as Lake‚Äôs operator signed off. All app
reciated the epoch-making significance of the discovery, and I sent La
ke congratulations as soon as the Arkham‚Äôs operator had repeated bac
k the descriptive parts as requested; and my example was followed by S
herman from his station at the McMurdo Sound supply cache, as well as 
by Capt. Douglas of the Arkham. Later, as head of the expedition, I ad
ded some remarks to be relayed through the Arkham to the outside world
. Of course, rest was an absurd thought amidst this excitement; and my
 only wish was to get to Lake‚Äôs camp as quickly as I could. It disap
pointed me when he sent word that a rising mountain gale made early a√
´rial travel impossible. But within an hour and a half interest again 
rose to banish disappointment. Lake was sending more messages, and tol
d of the completely successful transportation of the fourteen great sp
ecimens to the camp. It had been a hard pull, for the things were surp
risingly heavy; but nine men had accomplished it very neatly. Now some
 of the party were hurriedly building a snow corral at a safe distance
 from the camp, to which the dogs could be brought for greater conveni
ence in feeding. The specimens were laid out on the hard snow near the
 camp, save for one on which Lake was making crude attempts at dissect
ion. This dissection seemed to be a greater task than had been expecte
d; for despite the heat of a gasoline stove in the newly raised labora
tory tent, the deceptively flexible tissues of the chosen specimen‚Äîa
 powerful and intact one‚Äîlost nothing of their more than leathery to
ughness. Lake was puzzled as to how he might make the requisite incisi
ons without violence destructive enough to upset all the structural ni
ceties he was looking for. He had, it is true, seven more perfect spec
imens; but these were too few to use up recklessly unless the cave mig
ht later yield an unlimited supply. Accordingly he removed the specime
n and dragged in one which, though having remnants of the starfish-arr
angements at both ends, was badly crushed and partly disrupted along o
ne of the great torso furrows. Results, quickly reported over the wire
less, were baffling and provocative indeed. Nothing like delicacy or a
ccuracy was possible with instruments hardly able to cut the anomalous
 tissue, but the little that was achieved left us all awed and bewilde
red. Existing biology would have to be wholly revised, for this thing 
was no product of any cell-growth science knows about. There had been 
scarcely any mineral replacement, and despite an age of perhaps forty 
million years the internal organs were wholly intact. The leathery, un
deteriorative, and almost indestructible quality was an inherent attri
bute of the thing‚Äôs form of organisation; and pertained to some pala
eogean cycle of invertebrate evolution utterly beyond our powers of sp
eculation. At first all that Lake found was dry, but as the heated ten
t produced its thawing effect, organic moisture of pungent and offensi
ve odour was encountered toward the thing‚Äôs uninjured side. It was n
ot blood, but a thick, dark-green fluid apparently answering the same 
purpose. By the time Lake reached this stage all 37 dogs had been brou
ght to the still uncompleted corral near the camp; and even at that di
stance set up a savage barking and show of restlessness at the acrid, 
diffusive smell. Far from helping to place the strange entity, this pr
ovisional dissection merely deepened its mystery. All guesses about it
s external members had been correct, and on the evidence of these one 
could hardly hesitate to call the thing animal; but internal inspectio
n brought up so many vegetable evidences that Lake was left hopelessly
 at sea. It had digestion and circulation, and eliminated waste matter
 through the reddish tubes of its starfish-shaped base. Cursorily, one
 would say that its respiratory apparatus handled oxygen rather than c
arbon dioxide; and there were odd evidences of air-storage chambers an
d methods of shifting respiration from the external orifice to at leas
t two other fully developed breathing-systems‚Äîgills and pores. Clear
ly, it was amphibian and probably adapted to long airless hibernation-
periods as well. Vocal organs seemed present in connexion with the mai
n respiratory system, but they presented anomalies beyond immediate so
lution. Articulate speech, in the sense of syllable-utterance, seemed 
barely conceivable; but musical piping notes covering a wide range wer
e highly probable. The muscular system was almost preternaturally deve
loped. The nervous system was so complex and highly developed as to le
ave Lake aghast. Though excessively primitive and archaic in some resp
ects, the thing had a set of ganglial centres and connectives arguing 
the very extremes of specialised development. Its five-lobed brain was
 surprisingly advanced; and there were signs of a sensory equipment, s
erved in part through the wiry cilia of the head, involving factors al
ien to any other terrestrial organism. Probably it had more than five 
senses, so that its habits could not be predicted from any existing an
alogy. It must, Lake thought, have been a creature of keen sensitivene
ss and delicately differentiated functions in its primal world; much l
ike the ants and bees of today. It reproduced like the vegetable crypt
ogams, especially the pteridophytes; having spore-cases at the tips of
 the wings and evidently developing from a thallus or prothallus. But 
to give it a name at this stage was mere folly. It looked like a radia
te, but was clearly something more. It was partly vegetable, but had t
hree-fourths of the essentials of animal structure. That it was marine
 in origin, its symmetrical contour and certain other attributes clear
ly indicated; yet one could not be exact as to the limit of its later 
adaptations. The wings, after all, held a persistent suggestion of the
 a√´rial. How it could have undergone its tremendously complex evoluti
on on a new-born earth in time to leave prints in Archaean rocks was s
o far beyond conception as to make Lake whimsically recall the primal 
myths about Great Old Ones who filtered down from the stars and concoc
ted earth-life as a joke or mistake; and the wild tales of cosmic hill
 things from Outside told by a folklorist colleague in Miskatonic‚Äôs 
English department. Naturally, he considered the possibility of the pr
e-Cambrian prints‚Äô having been made by a less evolved ancestor of th
e present specimens; but quickly rejected this too facile theory upon 
considering the advanced structural qualities of the older fossils. If
 anything, the later contours shewed decadence rather than higher evol
ution. The size of the pseudo-feet had decreased, and the whole morpho
logy seemed coarsened and simplified. Moreover, the nerves and organs 
just examined held singular suggestions of retrogression from forms st
ill more complex. Atrophied and vestigial parts were surprisingly prev
alent. Altogether, little could be said to have been solved; and Lake 
fell back on mythology for a provisional name‚Äîjocosely dubbing his f
inds ‚ÄúThe Elder Ones‚Äù. At about 2:30 A.M., having decided to postp
one further work and get a little rest, he covered the dissected organ
ism with a tarpaulin, emerged from the laboratory tent, and studied th
e intact specimens with renewed interest. The ceaseless antarctic sun 
had begun to limber up their tissues a trifle, so that the head-points
 and tubes of two or three shewed signs of unfolding; but Lake did not
 believe there was any danger of immediate decomposition in the almost
 sub-zero air. He did, however, move all the undissected specimens clo
ser together and throw a spare tent over them in order to keep off the
 direct solar rays. That would also help to keep their possible scent 
away from the dogs, whose hostile unrest was really becoming a problem
 even at their substantial distance and behind the higher and higher s
now walls which an increased quota of the men were hastening to raise 
around their quarters. He had to weight down the corners of the tent-c
loth with heavy blocks of snow to hold it in place amidst the rising g
ale, for the titan mountains seemed about to deliver some gravely seve
re blasts. Early apprehensions about sudden antarctic winds were reviv
ed, and under Atwood‚Äôs supervision precautions were taken to bank th
e tents, new dog-corral, and crude a√´roplane shelters with snow on th
e mountainward side. These latter shelters, begun with hard snow block
s during odd moments, were by no means as high as they should have bee
n; and Lake finally detached all hands from other tasks to work on the
m. It was after four when Lake at last prepared to sign off and advise
d us all to share the rest period his outfit would take when the shelt
er walls were a little higher. He held some friendly chat with Pabodie
 over the ether, and repeated his praise of the really marvellous dril
ls that had helped him make his discovery. Atwood also sent greetings 
and praises. I gave Lake a warm word of congratulation, owning up that
 he was right about the western trip; and we all agreed to get in touc
h by wireless at ten in the morning. If the gale was then over, Lake w
ould send a plane for the party at my base. Just before retiring I des
patched a final message to the Arkham with instructions about toning d
own the day‚Äôs news for the outside world, since the full details see
med radical enough to rouse a wave of incredulity until further substa
ntiated. III. None of us, I imagine, slept very heavily or continuousl
y that morning; for both the excitement of Lake‚Äôs discovery and the 
mounting fury of the wind were against such a thing. So savage was the
 blast, even where we were, that we could not help wondering how much 
worse it was at Lake‚Äôs camp, directly under the vast unknown peaks t
hat bred and delivered it. McTighe was awake at ten o‚Äôclock and trie
d to get Lake on the wireless, as agreed, but some electrical conditio
n in the disturbed air to the westward seemed to prevent communication
. We did, however, get the Arkham, and Douglas told me that he had lik
ewise been vainly trying to reach Lake. He had not known about the win
d, for very little was blowing at McMurdo Sound despite its persistent
 rage where we were. Throughout the day we all listened anxiously and 
tried to get Lake at intervals, but invariably without results. About 
noon a positive frenzy of wind stampeded out of the west, causing us t
o fear for the safety of our camp; but it eventually died down, with o
nly a moderate relapse at 2 P.M. After three o‚Äôclock it was very qui
et, and we redoubled our efforts to get Lake. Reflecting that he had f
our planes, each provided with an excellent short-wave outfit, we coul
d not imagine any ordinary accident capable of crippling all his wirel
ess equipment at once. Nevertheless the stony silence continued; and w
hen we thought of the delirious force the wind must have had in his lo
cality we could not help making the most direful conjectures. By six o
‚Äôclock our fears had become intense and definite, and after a wirele
ss consultation with Douglas and Thorfinnssen I resolved to take steps
 toward investigation. The fifth a√´roplane, which we had left at the 
McMurdo Sound supply cache with Sherman and two sailors, was in good s
hape and ready for instant use; and it seemed that the very emergency 
for which it had been saved was now upon us. I got Sherman by wireless
 and ordered him to join me with the plane and the two sailors at the 
southern base as quickly as possible; the air conditions being apparen
tly highly favourable. We then talked over the personnel of the coming
 investigation party; and decided that we would include all hands, tog
ether with the sledge and dogs which I had kept with me. Even so great
 a load would not be too much for one of the huge planes built to our 
especial orders for heavy machinery transportation. At intervals I sti
ll tried to reach Lake with the wireless, but all to no purpose. Sherm
an, with the sailors Gunnarsson and Larsen, took off at 7:30; and repo
rted a quiet flight from several points on the wing. They arrived at o
ur base at midnight, and all hands at once discussed the next move. It
 was risky business sailing over the antarctic in a single a√´roplane 
without any line of bases, but no one drew back from what seemed like 
the plainest necessity. We turned in at two o‚Äôclock for a brief rest
 after some preliminary loading of the plane, but were up again in fou
r hours to finish the loading and packing. At 7:15 A.M., January 25th,
 we started flying northwestward under McTighe‚Äôs pilotage with ten m
en, seven dogs, a sledge, a fuel and food supply, and other items incl
uding the plane‚Äôs wireless outfit. The atmosphere was clear, fairly 
quiet, and relatively mild in temperature; and we anticipated very lit
tle trouble in reaching the latitude and longitude designated by Lake 
as the site of his camp. Our apprehensions were over what we might fin
d, or fail to find, at the end of our journey; for silence continued t
o answer all calls despatched to the camp. Every incident of that four
-and-a-half-hour flight is burned into my recollection because of its 
crucial position in my life. It marked my loss, at the age of fifty-fo
ur, of all that peace and balance which the normal mind possesses thro
ugh its accustomed conception of external Nature and Nature‚Äôs laws. 
Thenceforward the ten of us‚Äîbut the student Danforth and myself abov
e all others‚Äîwere to face a hideously amplified world of lurking hor
rors which nothing can erase from our emotions, and which we would ref
rain from sharing with mankind in general if we could. The newspapers 
have printed the bulletins we sent from the moving plane; telling of o
ur non-stop course, our two battles with treacherous upper-air gales, 
our glimpse of the broken surface where Lake had sunk his mid-journey 
shaft three days before, and our sight of a group of those strange flu
ffy snow-cylinders noted by Amundsen and Byrd as rolling in the wind a
cross the endless leagues of frozen plateau. There came a point, thoug
h, when our sensations could not be conveyed in any words the press wo
uld understand; and a later point when we had to adopt an actual rule 
of strict censorship. The sailor Larsen was first to spy the jagged li
ne of witch-like cones and pinnacles ahead, and his shouts sent everyo
ne to the windows of the great cabined plane. Despite our speed, they 
were very slow in gaining prominence; hence we knew that they must be 
infinitely far off, and visible only because of their abnormal height.
 Little by little, however, they rose grimly into the western sky; all
owing us to distinguish various bare, bleak, blackish summits, and to 
catch the curious sense of phantasy which they inspired as seen in the
 reddish antarctic light against the provocative background of iridesc
ent ice-dust clouds. In the whole spectacle there was a persistent, pe
rvasive hint of stupendous secrecy and potential revelation; as if the
se stark, nightmare spires marked the pylons of a frightful gateway in
to forbidden spheres of dream, and complex gulfs of remote time, space
, and ultra-dimensionality. I could not help feeling that they were ev
il things‚Äîmountains of madness whose farther slopes looked out over 
some accursed ultimate abyss. That seething, half-luminous cloud-backg
round held ineffable suggestions of a vague, ethereal beyondness far m
ore than terrestrially spatial; and gave appalling reminders of the ut
ter remoteness, separateness, desolation, and aeon-long death of this 
untrodden and unfathomed austral world. It was young Danforth who drew
 our notice to the curious regularities of the higher mountain skyline
‚Äîregularities like clinging fragments of perfect cubes, which Lake h
ad mentioned in his messages, and which indeed justified his compariso
n with the dream-like suggestions of primordial temple-ruins on cloudy
 Asian mountain-tops so subtly and strangely painted by Roerich. There
 was indeed something hauntingly Roerich-like about this whole unearth
ly continent of mountainous mystery. I had felt it in October when we 
first caught sight of Victoria Land, and I felt it afresh now. I felt,
 too, another wave of uneasy consciousness of Archaean mythical resemb
lances; of how disturbingly this lethal realm corresponded to the evil
ly famed plateau of Leng in the primal writings. Mythologists have pla
ced Leng in Central Asia; but the racial memory of man‚Äîor of his pre
decessors‚Äîis long, and it may well be that certain tales have come d
own from lands and mountains and temples of horror earlier than Asia a
nd earlier than any human world we know. A few daring mystics have hin
ted at a pre-Pleistocene origin for the fragmentary Pnakotic Manuscrip
ts, and have suggested that the devotees of Tsathoggua were as alien t
o mankind as Tsathoggua itself. Leng, wherever in space or time it mig
ht brood, was not a region I would care to be in or near; nor did I re
lish the proximity of a world that had ever bred such ambiguous and Ar
chaean monstrosities as those Lake had just mentioned. At the moment I
 felt sorry that I had ever read the abhorred Necronomicon, or talked 
so much with that unpleasantly erudite folklorist Wilmarth at the univ
ersity. This mood undoubtedly served to aggravate my reaction to the b
izarre mirage which burst upon us from the increasingly opalescent zen
ith as we drew near the mountains and began to make out the cumulative
 undulations of the foothills. I had seen dozens of polar mirages duri
ng the preceding weeks, some of them quite as uncanny and fantasticall
y vivid as the present sample; but this one had a wholly novel and obs
cure quality of menacing symbolism, and I shuddered as the seething la
byrinth of fabulous walls and towers and minarets loomed out of the tr
oubled ice-vapours above our heads. The effect was that of a Cyclopean
 city of no architecture known to man or to human imagination, with va
st aggregations of night-black masonry embodying monstrous perversions
 of geometrical laws and attaining the most grotesque extremes of sini
ster bizarrerie. There were truncated cones, sometimes terraced or flu
ted, surmounted by tall cylindrical shafts here and there bulbously en
larged and often capped with tiers of thinnish scalloped discs; and st
range, beetling, table-like constructions suggesting piles of multitud
inous rectangular slabs or circular plates or five-pointed stars with 
each one overlapping the one beneath. There were composite cones and p
yramids either alone or surmounting cylinders or cubes or flatter trun
cated cones and pyramids, and occasional needle-like spires in curious
 clusters of five. All of these febrile structures seemed knit togethe
r by tubular bridges crossing from one to the other at various dizzy h
eights, and the implied scale of the whole was terrifying and oppressi
ve in its sheer giganticism. The general type of mirage was not unlike
 some of the wilder forms observed and drawn by the Arctic whaler Scor
esby in 1820; but at this time and place, with those dark, unknown mou
ntain peaks soaring stupendously ahead, that anomalous elder-world dis
covery in our minds, and the pall of probable disaster enveloping the 
greater part of our expedition, we all seemed to find in it a taint of
 latent malignity and infinitely evil portent. I was glad when the mir
age began to break up, though in the process the various nightmare tur
rets and cones assumed distorted temporary forms of even vaster hideou
sness. As the whole illusion dissolved to churning opalescence we bega
n to look earthward again, and saw that our journey‚Äôs end was not fa
r off. The unknown mountains ahead rose dizzyingly up like a fearsome 
rampart of giants, their curious regularities shewing with startling c
learness even without a field-glass. We were over the lowest foothills
 now, and could see amidst the snow, ice, and bare patches of their ma
in plateau a couple of darkish spots which we took to be Lake‚Äôs camp
 and boring. The higher foothills shot up between five and six miles a
way, forming a range almost distinct from the terrifying line of more 
than Himalayan peaks beyond them. At length Ropes‚Äîthe student who ha
d relieved McTighe at the controls‚Äîbegan to head downward toward the
 left-hand dark spot whose size marked it as the camp. As he did so, M
cTighe sent out the last uncensored wireless message the world was to 
receive from our expedition. Everyone, of course, has read the brief a
nd unsatisfying bulletins of the rest of our antarctic sojourn. Some h
ours after our landing we sent a guarded report of the tragedy we foun
d, and reluctantly announced the wiping out of the whole Lake party by
 the frightful wind of the preceding day, or of the night before that.
 Eleven known dead, young Gedney missing. People pardoned our hazy lac
k of details through realisation of the shock the sad event must have 
caused us, and believed us when we explained that the mangling action 
of the wind had rendered all eleven bodies unsuitable for transportati
on outside. Indeed, I flatter myself that even in the midst of our dis
tress, utter bewilderment, and soul-clutching horror, we scarcely went
 beyond the truth in any specific instance. The tremendous significanc
e lies in what we dared not tell‚Äîwhat I would not tell now but for t
he need of warning others off from nameless terrors. It is a fact that
 the wind had wrought dreadful havoc. Whether all could have lived thr
ough it, even without the other thing, is gravely open to doubt. The s
torm, with its fury of madly driven ice-particles, must have been beyo
nd anything our expedition had encountered before. One a√´roplane shel
ter‚Äîall, it seems, had been left in a far too flimsy and inadequate 
state‚Äîwas nearly pulverised; and the derrick at the distant boring w
as entirely shaken to pieces. The exposed metal of the grounded planes
 and drilling machinery was bruised into a high polish, and two of the
 small tents were flattened despite their snow banking. Wooden surface
s left out in the blast were pitted and denuded of paint, and all sign
s of tracks in the snow were completely obliterated. It is also true t
hat we found none of the Archaean biological objects in a condition to
 take outside as a whole. We did gather some minerals from a vast tumb
led pile, including several of the greenish soapstone fragments whose 
odd five-pointed rounding and faint patterns of grouped dots caused so
 many doubtful comparisons; and some fossil bones, among which were th
e most typical of the curiously injured specimens. None of the dogs su
rvived, their hurriedly built snow enclosure near the camp being almos
t wholly destroyed. The wind may have done that, though the greater br
eakage on the side next the camp, which was not the windward one, sugg
ests an outward leap or break of the frantic beasts themselves. All th
ree sledges were gone, and we have tried to explain that the wind may 
have blown them off into the unknown. The drill and ice-melting machin
ery at the boring were too badly damaged to warrant salvage, so we use
d them to choke up that subtly disturbing gateway to the past which La
ke had blasted. We likewise left at the camp the two most shaken-up of
 the planes; since our surviving party had only four real pilots‚ÄîShe
rman, Danforth, McTighe, and Ropes‚Äîin all, with Danforth in a poor n
ervous shape to navigate. We brought back all the books, scientific eq
uipment, and other incidentals we could find, though much was rather u
naccountably blown away. Spare tents and furs were either missing or b
adly out of condition. It was approximately 4 P.M., after wide plane c
ruising had forced us to give Gedney up for lost, that we sent our gua
rded message to the Arkham for relaying; and I think we did well to ke
ep it as calm and non-committal as we succeeded in doing. The most we 
said about agitation concerned our dogs, whose frantic uneasiness near
 the biological specimens was to be expected from poor Lake‚Äôs accoun
ts. We did not mention, I think, their display of the same uneasiness 
when sniffing around the queer greenish soapstones and certain other o
bjects in the disordered region; objects including scientific instrume
nts, a√´roplanes, and machinery both at the camp and at the boring, wh
ose parts had been loosened, moved, or otherwise tampered with by wind
s that must have harboured singular curiosity and investigativeness. A
bout the fourteen biological specimens we were pardonably indefinite. 
We said that the only ones we discovered were damaged, but that enough
 was left of them to prove Lake‚Äôs description wholly and impressivel
y accurate. It was hard work keeping our personal emotions out of this
 matter‚Äîand we did not mention numbers or say exactly how we had fou
nd those which we did find. We had by that time agreed not to transmit
 anything suggesting madness on the part of Lake‚Äôs men, and it surel
y looked like madness to find six imperfect monstrosities carefully bu
ried upright in nine-foot snow graves under five-pointed mounds punche
d over with groups of dots in patterns exactly like those on the queer
 greenish soapstones dug up from Mesozoic or Tertiary times. The eight
 perfect specimens mentioned by Lake seemed to have been completely bl
own away. We were careful, too, about the public‚Äôs general peace of 
mind; hence Danforth and I said little about that frightful trip over 
the mountains the next day. It was the fact that only a radically ligh
tened plane could possibly cross a range of such height which merciful
ly limited that scouting tour to the two of us. On our return at 1 A.M
. Danforth was close to hysterics, but kept an admirably stiff upper l
ip. It took no persuasion to make him promise not to shew our sketches
 and the other things we brought away in our pockets, not to say anyth
ing more to the others than what we had agreed to relay outside, and t
o hide our camera films for private development later on; so that part
 of my present story will be as new to Pabodie, McTighe, Ropes, Sherma
n, and the rest as it will be to the world in general. Indeed‚ÄîDanfor
th is closer mouthed than I; for he saw‚Äîor thinks he saw‚Äîone thing
 he will not tell even me. As all know, our report included a tale of 
a hard ascent; a confirmation of Lake‚Äôs opinion that the great peaks
 are of Archaean slate and other very primal crumpled strata unchanged
 since at least middle Comanchian times; a conventional comment on the
 regularity of the clinging cube and rampart formations; a decision th
at the cave-mouths indicate dissolved calcareous veins; a conjecture t
hat certain slopes and passes would permit of the scaling and crossing
 of the entire range by seasoned mountaineers; and a remark that the m
ysterious other side holds a lofty and immense super-plateau as ancien
t and unchanging as the mountains themselves‚Äî20,000 feet in elevatio
n, with grotesque rock formations protruding through a thin glacial la
yer and with low gradual foothills between the general plateau surface
 and the sheer precipices of the highest peaks. This body of data is i
n every respect true so far as it goes, and it completely satisfied th
e men at the camp. We laid our absence of sixteen hours‚Äîa longer tim
e than our announced flying, landing, reconnoitring, and rock-collecti
ng programme called for‚Äîto a long mythical spell of adverse wind con
ditions; and told truly of our landing on the farther foothills. Fortu
nately our tale sounded realistic and prosaic enough not to tempt any 
of the others into emulating our flight. Had any tried to do that, I w
ould have used every ounce of my persuasion to stop them‚Äîand I do no
t know what Danforth would have done. While we were gone, Pabodie, She
rman, Ropes, McTighe, and Williamson had worked like beavers over Lake
‚Äôs two best planes; fitting them again for use despite the altogethe
r unaccountable juggling of their operative mechanism. We decided to l
oad all the planes the next morning and start back for our old base as
 soon as possible. Even though indirect, that was the safest way to wo
rk toward McMurdo Sound; for a straight-line flight across the most ut
terly unknown stretches of the aeon-dead continent would involve many 
additional hazards. Further exploration was hardly feasible in view of
 our tragic decimation and the ruin of our drilling machinery; and the
 doubts and horrors around us‚Äîwhich we did not reveal‚Äîmade us wish
 only to escape from this austral world of desolation and brooding mad
ness as swiftly as we could. As the public knows, our return to the wo
rld was accomplished without further disasters. All planes reached the
 old base on the evening of the next day‚ÄîJanuary 27th‚Äîafter a swif
t non-stop flight; and on the 28th we made McMurdo Sound in two laps, 
the one pause being very brief, and occasioned by a faulty rudder in t
he furious wind over the ice-shelf after we had cleared the great plat
eau. In five days more the Arkham and Miskatonic, with all hands and e
quipment on board, were shaking clear of the thickening field ice and 
working up Ross Sea with the mocking mountains of Victoria Land loomin
g westward against a troubled antarctic sky and twisting the wind‚Äôs 
wails into a wide-ranged musical piping which chilled my soul to the q
uick. Less than a fortnight later we left the last hint of polar land 
behind us, and thanked heaven that we were clear of a haunted, accurse
d realm where life and death, space and time, have made black and blas
phemous alliances in the unknown epochs since matter first writhed and
 swam on the planet‚Äôs scarce-cooled crust. Since our return we have 
all constantly worked to discourage antarctic exploration, and have ke
pt certain doubts and guesses to ourselves with splendid unity and fai
thfulness. Even young Danforth, with his nervous breakdown, has not fl
inched or babbled to his doctors‚Äîindeed, as I have said, there is on
e thing he thinks he alone saw which he will not tell even me, though 
I think it would help his psychological state if he would consent to d
o so. It might explain and relieve much, though perhaps the thing was 
no more than the delusive aftermath of an earlier shock. That is the i
mpression I gather after those rare irresponsible moments when he whis
pers disjointed things to me‚Äîthings which he repudiates vehemently a
s soon as he gets a grip on himself again. It will be hard work deterr
ing others from the great white south, and some of our efforts may dir
ectly harm our cause by drawing inquiring notice. We might have known 
from the first that human curiosity is undying, and that the results w
e announced would be enough to spur others ahead on the same age-long 
pursuit of the unknown. Lake‚Äôs reports of those biological monstrosi
ties had aroused naturalists and palaeontologists to the highest pitch
; though we were sensible enough not to shew the detached parts we had
 taken from the actual buried specimens, or our photographs of those s
pecimens as they were found. We also refrained from shewing the more p
uzzling of the scarred bones and greenish soapstones; while Danforth a
nd I have closely guarded the pictures we took or drew on the super-pl
ateau across the range, and the crumpled things we smoothed, studied i
n terror, and brought away in our pockets. But now that Starkweather-M
oore party is organising, and with a thoroughness far beyond anything 
our outfit attempted. If not dissuaded, they will get to the innermost
 nucleus of the antarctic and melt and bore till they bring up that wh
ich may end the world we know. So I must break through all reticences 
at last‚Äîeven about that ultimate nameless thing beyond the mountains
 of madness. IV. It is only with vast hesitancy and repugnance that I 
let my mind go back to Lake‚Äôs camp and what we really found there‚Äî
and to that other thing beyond the frightful mountain wall. I am const
antly tempted to shirk the details, and to let hints stand for actual 
facts and ineluctable deductions. I hope I have said enough already to
 let me glide briefly over the rest; the rest, that is, of the horror 
at the camp. I have told of the wind-ravaged terrain, the damaged shel
ters, the disarranged machinery, the varied uneasinesses of our dogs, 
the missing sledges and other items, the deaths of men and dogs, the a
bsence of Gedney, and the six insanely buried biological specimens, st
rangely sound in texture for all their structural injuries, from a wor
ld forty million years dead. I do not recall whether I mentioned that 
upon checking up the canine bodies we found one dog missing. We did no
t think much about that till later‚Äîindeed, only Danforth and I have 
thought of it at all. The principal things I have been keeping back re
late to the bodies, and to certain subtle points which may or may not 
lend a hideous and incredible kind of rationale to the apparent chaos.
 At the time I tried to keep the men‚Äôs minds off those points; for i
t was so much simpler‚Äîso much more normal‚Äîto lay everything to an 
outbreak of madness on the part of some of Lake‚Äôs party. From the lo
ok of things, that daemon mountain wind must have been enough to drive
 any man mad in the midst of this centre of all earthly mystery and de
solation. The crowning abnormality, of course, was the condition of th
e bodies‚Äîmen and dogs alike. They had all been in some terrible kind
 of conflict, and were torn and mangled in fiendish and altogether ine
xplicable ways. Death, so far as we could judge, had in each case come
 from strangulation or laceration. The dogs had evidently started the 
trouble, for the state of their ill-built corral bore witness to its f
orcible breakage from within. It had been set some distance from the c
amp because of the hatred of the animals for those hellish Archaean or
ganisms, but the precaution seemed to have been taken in vain. When le
ft alone in that monstrous wind behind flimsy walls of insufficient he
ight they must have stampeded‚Äîwhether from the wind itself, or from 
some subtle, increasing odour emitted by the nightmare specimens, one 
could not say. Those specimens, of course, had been covered with a ten
t-cloth; yet the low antarctic sun had beat steadily upon that cloth, 
and Lake had mentioned that solar heat tended to make the strangely so
und and tough tissues of the things relax and expand. Perhaps the wind
 had whipped the cloth from over them, and jostled them about in such 
a way that their more pungent olfactory qualities became manifest desp
ite their unbelievable antiquity. But whatever had happened, it was hi
deous and revolting enough. Perhaps I had better put squeamishness asi
de and tell the worst at last‚Äîthough with a categorical statement of
 opinion, based on the first-hand observations and most rigid deductio
ns of both Danforth and myself, that the then missing Gedney was in no
 way responsible for the loathsome horrors we found. I have said that 
the bodies were frightfully mangled. Now I must add that some were inc
ised and subtracted from in the most curious, cold-blooded, and inhuma
n fashion. It was the same with dogs and men. All the healthier, fatte
r bodies, quadrupedal or bipedal, had had their most solid masses of t
issue cut out and removed, as by a careful butcher; and around them wa
s a strange sprinkling of salt‚Äîtaken from the ravaged provision-ches
ts on the planes‚Äîwhich conjured up the most horrible associations. T
he thing had occurred in one of the crude a√´roplane shelters from whi
ch the plane had been dragged out, and subsequent winds had effaced al
l tracks which could have supplied any plausible theory. Scattered bit
s of clothing, roughly slashed from the human incision-subjects, hinte
d no clues. It is useless to bring up the half-impression of certain f
aint snow-prints in one shielded corner of the ruined enclosure‚Äîbeca
use that impression did not concern human prints at all, but was clear
ly mixed up with all the talk of fossil prints which poor Lake had bee
n giving throughout the preceding weeks. One had to be careful of one‚
Äôs imagination in the lee of those overshadowing mountains of madness
. As I have indicated, Gedney and one dog turned out to be missing in 
the end. When we came on that terrible shelter we had missed two dogs 
and two men; but the fairly unharmed dissecting tent, which we entered
 after investigating the monstrous graves, had something to reveal. It
 was not as Lake had left it, for the covered parts of the primal mons
trosity had been removed from the improvised table. Indeed, we had alr
eady realised that one of the six imperfect and insanely buried things
 we had found‚Äîthe one with the trace of a peculiarly hateful odour‚Ä
îmust represent the collected sections of the entity which Lake had tr
ied to analyse. On and around that laboratory table were strown other 
things, and it did not take long for us to guess that those things wer
e the carefully though oddly and inexpertly dissected parts of one man
 and one dog. I shall spare the feelings of survivors by omitting ment
ion of the man‚Äôs identity. Lake‚Äôs anatomical instruments were miss
ing, but there were evidences of their careful cleansing. The gasoline
 stove was also gone, though around it we found a curious litter of ma
tches. We buried the human parts beside the other ten men, and the can
ine parts with the other 35 dogs. Concerning the bizarre smudges on th
e laboratory table, and on the jumble of roughly handled illustrated b
ooks scattered near it, we were much too bewildered to speculate. This
 formed the worst of the camp horror, but other things were equally pe
rplexing. The disappearance of Gedney, the one dog, the eight uninjure
d biological specimens, the three sledges, and certain instruments, il
lustrated technical and scientific books, writing materials, electric 
torches and batteries, food and fuel, heating apparatus, spare tents, 
fur suits, and the like, was utterly beyond sane conjecture; as were l
ikewise the spatter-fringed ink-blots on certain pieces of paper, and 
the evidences of curious alien fumbling and experimentation around the
 planes and all other mechanical devices both at the camp and at the b
oring. The dogs seemed to abhor this oddly disordered machinery. Then,
 too, there was the upsetting of the larder, the disappearance of cert
ain staples, and the jarringly comical heap of tin cans pried open in 
the most unlikely ways and at the most unlikely places. The profusion 
of scattered matches, intact, broken, or spent, formed another minor e
nigma; as did the two or three tent-cloths and fur suits which we foun
d lying about with peculiar and unorthodox slashings conceivably due t
o clumsy efforts at unimaginable adaptations. The maltreatment of the 
human and canine bodies, and the crazy burial of the damaged Archaean 
specimens, were all of a piece with this apparent disintegrative madne
ss. In view of just such an eventuality as the present one, we careful
ly photographed all the main evidences of insane disorder at the camp;
 and shall use the prints to buttress our pleas against the departure 
of the proposed Starkweather-Moore Expedition. Our first act after fin
ding the bodies in the shelter was to photograph and open the row of i
nsane graves with the five-pointed snow mounds. We could not help noti
cing the resemblance of these monstrous mounds, with their clusters of
 grouped dots, to poor Lake‚Äôs descriptions of the strange greenish s
oapstones; and when we came on some of the soapstones themselves in th
e great mineral pile we found the likeness very close indeed. The whol
e general formation, it must be made clear, seemed abominably suggesti
ve of the starfish-head of the Archaean entities; and we agreed that t
he suggestion must have worked potently upon the sensitised minds of L
ake‚Äôs overwrought party. Our own first sight of the actual buried en
tities formed a horrible moment, and sent the imaginations of Pabodie 
and myself back to some of the shocking primal myths we had read and h
eard. We all agreed that the mere sight and continued presence of the 
things must have co√∂perated with the oppressive polar solitude and da
emon mountain wind in driving Lake‚Äôs party mad. For madness‚Äîcentri
ng in Gedney as the only possible surviving agent‚Äîwas the explanatio
n spontaneously adopted by everybody so far as spoken utterance was co
ncerned; though I will not be so naive as to deny that each of us may 
have harboured wild guesses which sanity forbade him to formulate comp
letely. Sherman, Pabodie, and McTighe made an exhaustive a√´roplane cr
uise over all the surrounding territory in the afternoon, sweeping the
 horizon with field-glasses in quest of Gedney and of the various miss
ing things; but nothing came to light. The party reported that the tit
an barrier range extended endlessly to right and left alike, without a
ny diminution in height or essential structure. On some of the peaks, 
though, the regular cube and rampart formations were bolder and plaine
r; having doubly fantastic similitudes to Roerich-painted Asian hill r
uins. The distribution of cryptical cave-mouths on the black snow-denu
ded summits seemed roughly even as far as the range could be traced. I
n spite of all the prevailing horrors we were left with enough sheer s
cientific zeal and adventurousness to wonder about the unknown realm b
eyond those mysterious mountains. As our guarded messages stated, we r
ested at midnight after our day of terror and bafflement; but not with
out a tentative plan for one or more range-crossing altitude flights i
n a lightened plane with a√´rial camera and geologist‚Äôs outfit, begi
nning the following morning. It was decided that Danforth and I try it
 first, and we awaked at 7 A.M. intending an early trip; though heavy 
winds‚Äîmentioned in our brief bulletin to the outside world‚Äîdelayed
 our start till nearly nine o‚Äôclock. I have already repeated the non
-committal story we told the men at camp‚Äîand relayed outside‚Äîafter
 our return sixteen hours later. It is now my terrible duty to amplify
 this account by filling in the merciful blanks with hints of what we 
really saw in the hidden trans-montane world‚Äîhints of the revelation
s which have finally driven Danforth to a nervous collapse. I wish he 
would add a really frank word about the thing which he thinks he alone
 saw‚Äîeven though it was probably a nervous delusion‚Äîand which was 
perhaps the last straw that put him where he is; but he is firm agains
t that. All I can do is to repeat his later disjointed whispers about 
what set him shrieking as the plane soared back through the wind-tortu
red mountain pass after that real and tangible shock which I shared. T
his will form my last word. If the plain signs of surviving elder horr
ors in what I disclose be not enough to keep others from meddling with
 the inner antarctic‚Äîor at least from prying too deeply beneath the 
surface of that ultimate waste of forbidden secrets and unhuman, aeon-
cursed desolation‚Äîthe responsibility for unnamable and perhaps immen
surable evils will not be mine. Danforth and I, studying the notes mad
e by Pabodie in his afternoon flight and checking up with a sextant, h
ad calculated that the lowest available pass in the range lay somewhat
 to the right of us, within sight of camp, and about 23,000 or 24,000 
feet above sea-level. For this point, then, we first headed in the lig
htened plane as we embarked on our flight of discovery. The camp itsel
f, on foothills which sprang from a high continental plateau, was some
 12,000 feet in altitude; hence the actual height increase necessary w
as not so vast as it might seem. Nevertheless we were acutely consciou
s of the rarefied air and intense cold as we rose; for on account of v
isibility conditions we had to leave the cabin windows open. We were d
ressed, of course, in our heaviest furs. As we drew near the forbiddin
g peaks, dark and sinister above the line of crevasse-riven snow and i
nterstitial glaciers, we noticed more and more the curiously regular f
ormations clinging to the slopes; and thought again of the strange Asi
an paintings of Nicholas Roerich. The ancient and wind-weathered rock 
strata fully verified all of Lake‚Äôs bulletins, and proved that these
 hoary pinnacles had been towering up in exactly the same way since a 
surprisingly early time in earth‚Äôs history‚Äîperhaps over fifty mill
ion years. How much higher they had once been, it was futile to guess;
 but everything about this strange region pointed to obscure atmospher
ic influences unfavourable to change, and calculated to retard the usu
al climatic processes of rock disintegration. But it was the mountains
ide tangle of regular cubes, ramparts, and cave-mouths which fascinate
d and disturbed us most. I studied them with a field-glass and took a√
´rial photographs whilst Danforth drove; and at times relieved him at 
the controls‚Äîthough my aviation knowledge was purely an amateur‚Äôs‚
Äîin order to let him use the binoculars. We could easily see that muc
h of the material of the things was a lightish Archaean quartzite, unl
ike any formation visible over broad areas of the general surface; and
 that their regularity was extreme and uncanny to an extent which poor
 Lake had scarcely hinted. As he had said, their edges were crumbled a
nd rounded from untold aeons of savage weathering; but their preternat
ural solidity and tough material had saved them from obliteration. Man
y parts, especially those closest to the slopes, seemed identical in s
ubstance with the surrounding rock surface. The whole arrangement look
ed like the ruins of Machu Picchu in the Andes, or the primal foundati
on-walls of Kish as dug up by the Oxford‚ÄìField Museum Expedition in 
1929; and both Danforth and I obtained that occasional impression of s
eparate Cyclopean blocks which Lake had attributed to his flight-compa
nion Carroll. How to account for such things in this place was frankly
 beyond me, and I felt queerly humbled as a geologist. Igneous formati
ons often have strange regularities‚Äîlike the famous Giants‚Äô Causew
ay in Ireland‚Äîbut this stupendous range, despite Lake‚Äôs original s
uspicion of smoking cones, was above all else non-volcanic in evident 
structure. The curious cave-mouths, near which the odd formations seem
ed most abundant, presented another albeit a lesser puzzle because of 
their regularity of outline. They were, as Lake‚Äôs bulletin had said,
 often approximately square or semicircular; as if the natural orifice
s had been shaped to greater symmetry by some magic hand. Their numero
usness and wide distribution were remarkable, and suggested that the w
hole region was honeycombed with tunnels dissolved out of limestone st
rata. Such glimpses as we secured did not extend far within the cavern
s, but we saw that they were apparently clear of stalactites and stala
gmites. Outside, those parts of the mountain slopes adjoining the aper
tures seemed invariably smooth and regular; and Danforth thought that 
the slight cracks and pittings of the weathering tended toward unusual
 patterns. Filled as he was with the horrors and strangenesses discove
red at the camp, he hinted that the pittings vaguely resembled those b
affling groups of dots sprinkled over the primeval greenish soapstones
, so hideously duplicated on the madly conceived snow mounds above tho
se six buried monstrosities. We had risen gradually in flying over the
 higher foothills and along toward the relatively low pass we had sele
cted. As we advanced we occasionally looked down at the snow and ice o
f the land route, wondering whether we could have attempted the trip w
ith the simpler equipment of earlier days. Somewhat to our surprise we
 saw that the terrain was far from difficult as such things go; and th
at despite the crevasses and other bad spots it would not have been li
kely to deter the sledges of a Scott, a Shackleton, or an Amundsen. So
me of the glaciers appeared to lead up to wind-bared passes with unusu
al continuity, and upon reaching our chosen pass we found that its cas
e formed no exception. Our sensations of tense expectancy as we prepar
ed to round the crest and peer out over an untrodden world can hardly 
be described on paper; even though we had no cause to think the region
s beyond the range essentially different from those already seen and t
raversed. The touch of evil mystery in these barrier mountains, and in
 the beckoning sea of opalescent sky glimpsed betwixt their summits, w
as a highly subtle and attenuated matter not to be explained in litera
l words. Rather was it an affair of vague psychological symbolism and 
aesthetic association‚Äîa thing mixed up with exotic poetry and painti
ngs, and with archaic myths lurking in shunned and forbidden volumes. 
Even the wind‚Äôs burden held a peculiar strain of conscious malignity
; and for a second it seemed that the composite sound included a bizar
re musical whistling or piping over a wide range as the blast swept in
 and out of the omnipresent and resonant cave-mouths. There was a clou
dy note of reminiscent repulsion in this sound, as complex and unplace
able as any of the other dark impressions. We were now, after a slow a
scent, at a height of 23,570 feet according to the aneroid; and had le
ft the region of clinging snow definitely below us. Up here were only 
dark, bare rock slopes and the start of rough-ribbed glaciers‚Äîbut wi
th those provocative cubes, ramparts, and echoing cave-mouths to add a
 portent of the unnatural, the fantastic, and the dream-like. Looking 
along the line of high peaks, I thought I could see the one mentioned 
by poor Lake, with a rampart exactly on top. It seemed to be half-lost
 in a queer antarctic haze; such a haze, perhaps, as had been responsi
ble for Lake‚Äôs early notion of volcanism. The pass loomed directly b
efore us, smooth and windswept between its jagged and malignly frownin
g pylons. Beyond it was a sky fretted with swirling vapours and lighte
d by the low polar sun‚Äîthe sky of that mysterious farther realm upon
 which we felt no human eye had ever gazed. A few more feet of altitud
e and we would behold that realm. Danforth and I, unable to speak exce
pt in shouts amidst the howling, piping wind that raced through the pa
ss and added to the noise of the unmuffled engines, exchanged eloquent
 glances. And then, having gained those last few feet, we did indeed s
tare across the momentous divide and over the unsampled secrets of an 
elder and utterly alien earth. V. I think that both of us simultaneous
ly cried out in mixed awe, wonder, terror, and disbelief in our own se
nses as we finally cleared the pass and saw what lay beyond. Of course
 we must have had some natural theory in the back of our heads to stea
dy our faculties for the moment. Probably we thought of such things as
 the grotesquely weathered stones of the Garden of the Gods in Colorad
o, or the fantastically symmetrical wind-carved rocks of the Arizona d
esert. Perhaps we even half thought the sight a mirage like that we ha
d seen the morning before on first approaching those mountains of madn
ess. We must have had some such normal notions to fall back upon as ou
r eyes swept that limitless, tempest-scarred plateau and grasped the a
lmost endless labyrinth of colossal, regular, and geometrically eurhyt
hmic stone masses which reared their crumbled and pitted crests above 
a glacial sheet not more than forty or fifty feet deep at its thickest
, and in places obviously thinner. The effect of the monstrous sight w
as indescribable, for some fiendish violation of known natural law see
med certain at the outset. Here, on a hellishly ancient table-land ful
ly 20,000 feet high, and in a climate deadly to habitation since a pre
-human age not less than 500,000 years ago, there stretched nearly to 
the vision‚Äôs limit a tangle of orderly stone which only the desperat
ion of mental self-defence could possibly attribute to any but a consc
ious and artificial cause. We had previously dismissed, so far as seri
ous thought was concerned, any theory that the cubes and ramparts of t
he mountainsides were other than natural in origin. How could they be 
otherwise, when man himself could scarcely have been differentiated fr
om the great apes at the time when this region succumbed to the presen
t unbroken reign of glacial death? Yet now the sway of reason seemed i
rrefutably shaken, for this Cyclopean maze of squared, curved, and ang
led blocks had features which cut off all comfortable refuge. It was, 
very clearly, the blasphemous city of the mirage in stark, objective, 
and ineluctable reality. That damnable portent had had a material basi
s after all‚Äîthere had been some horizontal stratum of ice-dust in th
e upper air, and this shocking stone survival had projected its image 
across the mountains according to the simple laws of reflection. Of co
urse the phantom had been twisted and exaggerated, and had contained t
hings which the real source did not contain; yet now, as we saw that r
eal source, we thought it even more hideous and menacing than its dist
ant image. Only the incredible, unhuman massiveness of these vast ston
e towers and ramparts had saved the frightful thing from utter annihil
ation in the hundreds of thousands‚Äîperhaps millions‚Äîof years it ha
d brooded there amidst the blasts of a bleak upland. ‚ÄúCorona Mundi .
 . . Roof of the World . . .‚Äù All sorts of fantastic phrases sprang 
to our lips as we looked dizzily down at the unbelievable spectacle. I
 thought again of the eldritch primal myths that had so persistently h
aunted me since my first sight of this dead antarctic world‚Äîof the d
aemoniac plateau of Leng, of the Mi-Go, or Abominable Snow-Men of the 
Himalayas, of the Pnakotic Manuscripts with their pre-human implicatio
ns, of the Cthulhu cult, of the Necronomicon, and of the Hyperborean l
egends of formless Tsathoggua and the worse than formless star-spawn a
ssociated with that semi-entity. For boundless miles in every directio
n the thing stretched off with very little thinning; indeed, as our ey
es followed it to the right and left along the base of the low, gradua
l foothills which separated it from the actual mountain rim, we decide
d that we could see no thinning at all except for an interruption at t
he left of the pass through which we had come. We had merely struck, a
t random, a limited part of something of incalculable extent. The foot
hills were more sparsely sprinkled with grotesque stone structures, li
nking the terrible city to the already familiar cubes and ramparts whi
ch evidently formed its mountain outposts. These latter, as well as th
e queer cave-mouths, were as thick on the inner as on the outer sides 
of the mountains. The nameless stone labyrinth consisted, for the most
 part, of walls from 10 to 150 feet in ice-clear height, and of a thic
kness varying from five to ten feet. It was composed mostly of prodigi
ous blocks of dark primordial slate, schist, and sandstone‚Äîblocks in
 many cases as large as 4 √ó 6 √ó 8 feet‚Äîthough in several places it
 seemed to be carved out of a solid, uneven bed-rock of pre-Cambrian s
late. The buildings were far from equal in size; there being innumerab
le honeycomb-arrangements of enormous extent as well as smaller separa
te structures. The general shape of these things tended to be conical,
 pyramidal, or terraced; though there were many perfect cylinders, per
fect cubes, clusters of cubes, and other rectangular forms, and a pecu
liar sprinkling of angled edifices whose five-pointed ground plan roug
hly suggested modern fortifications. The builders had made constant an
d expert use of the principle of the arch, and domes had probably exis
ted in the city‚Äôs heyday. The whole tangle was monstrously weathered
, and the glacial surface from which the towers projected was strewn w
ith fallen blocks and immemorial debris. Where the glaciation was tran
sparent we could see the lower parts of the gigantic piles, and notice
d the ice-preserved stone bridges which connected the different towers
 at varying distances above the ground. On the exposed walls we could 
detect the scarred places where other and higher bridges of the same s
ort had existed. Closer inspection revealed countless largish windows;
 some of which were closed with shutters of a petrified material origi
nally wood, though most gaped open in a sinister and menacing fashion.
 Many of the ruins, of course, were roofless, and with uneven though w
ind-rounded upper edges; whilst others, of a more sharply conical or p
yramidal model or else protected by higher surrounding structures, pre
served intact outlines despite the omnipresent crumbling and pitting. 
With the field-glass we could barely make out what seemed to be sculpt
ural decorations in horizontal bands‚Äîdecorations including those cur
ious groups of dots whose presence on the ancient soapstones now assum
ed a vastly larger significance. In many places the buildings were tot
ally ruined and the ice-sheet deeply riven from various geologic cause
s. In other places the stonework was worn down to the very level of th
e glaciation. One broad swath, extending from the plateau‚Äôs interior
 to a cleft in the foothills about a mile to the left of the pass we h
ad traversed, was wholly free from buildings; and probably represented
, we concluded, the course of some great river which in Tertiary times
‚Äîmillions of years ago‚Äîhad poured through the city and into some p
rodigious subterranean abyss of the great barrier range. Certainly, th
is was above all a region of caves, gulfs, and underground secrets bey
ond human penetration. Looking back to our sensations, and recalling o
ur dazedness at viewing this monstrous survival from aeons we had thou
ght pre-human, I can only wonder that we preserved the semblance of eq
uilibrium which we did. Of course we knew that something‚Äîchronology,
 scientific theory, or our own consciousness‚Äîwas woefully awry; yet 
we kept enough poise to guide the plane, observe many things quite min
utely, and take a careful series of photographs which may yet serve bo
th us and the world in good stead. In my case, ingrained scientific ha
bit may have helped; for above all my bewilderment and sense of menace
 there burned a dominant curiosity to fathom more of this age-old secr
et‚Äîto know what sort of beings had built and lived in this incalcula
bly gigantic place, and what relation to the general world of its time
 or of other times so unique a concentration of life could have had. F
or this place could be no ordinary city. It must have formed the prima
ry nucleus and centre of some archaic and unbelievable chapter of eart
h‚Äôs history whose outward ramifications, recalled only dimly in the 
most obscure and distorted myths, had vanished utterly amidst the chao
s of terrene convulsions long before any human race we know had shambl
ed out of apedom. Here sprawled a palaeogean megalopolis compared with
 which the fabled Atlantis and Lemuria, Commoriom and Uzuldaroum, and 
Olatho√´ in the land of Lomar are recent things of today‚Äînot even of
 yesterday; a megalopolis ranking with such whispered pre-human blasph
emies as Valusia, R‚Äôlyeh, Ib in the land of Mnar, and the Nameless C
ity of Arabia Deserta. As we flew above that tangle of stark titan tow
ers my imagination sometimes escaped all bounds and roved aimlessly in
 realms of fantastic associations‚Äîeven weaving links betwixt this lo
st world and some of my own wildest dreams concerning the mad horror a
t the camp. The plane‚Äôs fuel-tank, in the interest of greater lightn
ess, had been only partly filled; hence we now had to exert caution in
 our explorations. Even so, however, we covered an enormous extent of 
ground‚Äîor rather, air‚Äîafter swooping down to a level where the win
d became virtually negligible. There seemed to be no limit to the moun
tain-range, or to the length of the frightful stone city which bordere
d its inner foothills. Fifty miles of flight in each direction shewed 
no major change in the labyrinth of rock and masonry that clawed up co
rpse-like through the eternal ice. There were, though, some highly abs
orbing diversifications; such as the carvings on the canyon where that
 broad river had once pierced the foothills and approached its sinking
-place in the great range. The headlands at the stream‚Äôs entrance ha
d been boldly carved into Cyclopean pylons; and something about the ri
dgy, barrel-shaped designs stirred up oddly vague, hateful, and confus
ing semi-remembrances in both Danforth and me. We also came upon sever
al star-shaped open spaces, evidently public squares; and noted variou
s undulations in the terrain. Where a sharp hill rose, it was generall
y hollowed out into some sort of rambling stone edifice; but there wer
e at least two exceptions. Of these latter, one was too badly weathere
d to disclose what had been on the jutting eminence, while the other s
till bore a fantastic conical monument carved out of the solid rock an
d roughly resembling such things as the well-known Snake Tomb in the a
ncient valley of Petra. Flying inland from the mountains, we discovere
d that the city was not of infinite width, even though its length alon
g the foothills seemed endless. After about thirty miles the grotesque
 stone buildings began to thin out, and in ten more miles we came to a
n unbroken waste virtually without signs of sentient artifice. The cou
rse of the river beyond the city seemed marked by a broad depressed li
ne; while the land assumed a somewhat greater ruggedness, seeming to s
lope slightly upward as it receded in the mist-hazed west. So far we h
ad made no landing, yet to leave the plateau without an attempt at ent
ering some of the monstrous structures would have been inconceivable. 
Accordingly we decided to find a smooth place on the foothills near ou
r navigable pass, there grounding the plane and preparing to do some e
xploration on foot. Though these gradual slopes were partly covered wi
th a scattering of ruins, low flying soon disclosed an ample number of
 possible landing-places. Selecting that nearest to the pass, since ou
r next flight would be across the great range and back to camp, we suc
ceeded about 12:30 P.M. in coming down on a smooth, hard snowfield who
lly devoid of obstacles and well adapted to a swift and favourable tak
eoff later on. It did not seem necessary to protect the plane with a s
now banking for so brief a time and in so comfortable an absence of hi
gh winds at this level; hence we merely saw that the landing skis were
 safely lodged, and that the vital parts of the mechanism were guarded
 against the cold. For our foot journey we discarded the heaviest of o
ur flying furs, and took with us a small outfit consisting of pocket c
ompass, hand camera, light provisions, voluminous notebooks and paper,
 geologist‚Äôs hammer and chisel, specimen-bags, coil of climbing rope
, and powerful electric torches with extra batteries; this equipment h
aving been carried in the plane on the chance that we might be able to
 effect a landing, take ground pictures, make drawings and topographic
al sketches, and obtain rock specimens from some bare slope, outcroppi
ng, or mountain cave. Fortunately we had a supply of extra paper to te
ar up, place in a spare specimen-bag, and use on the ancient principle
 of hare-and-hounds for marking our course in any interior mazes we mi
ght be able to penetrate. This had been brought in case we found some 
cave system with air quiet enough to allow such a rapid and easy metho
d in place of the usual rock-chipping method of trail-blazing. Walking
 cautiously downhill over the crusted snow toward the stupendous stone
 labyrinth that loomed against the opalescent west, we felt almost as 
keen a sense of imminent marvels as we had felt on approaching the unf
athomed mountain pass four hours previously. True, we had become visua
lly familiar with the incredible secret concealed by the barrier peaks
; yet the prospect of actually entering primordial walls reared by con
scious beings perhaps millions of years ago‚Äîbefore any known race of
 men could have existed‚Äîwas none the less awesome and potentially te
rrible in its implications of cosmic abnormality. Though the thinness 
of the air at this prodigious altitude made exertion somewhat more dif
ficult than usual; both Danforth and I found ourselves bearing up very
 well, and felt equal to almost any task which might fall to our lot. 
It took only a few steps to bring us to a shapeless ruin worn level wi
th the snow, while ten or fifteen rods farther on there was a huge roo
fless rampart still complete in its gigantic five-pointed outline and 
rising to an irregular height of ten or eleven feet. For this latter w
e headed; and when at last we were able actually to touch its weathere
d Cyclopean blocks, we felt that we had established an unprecedented a
nd almost blasphemous link with forgotten aeons normally closed to our
 species. This rampart, shaped like a star and perhaps 300 feet from p
oint to point, was built of Jurassic sandstone blocks of irregular siz
e, averaging 6 √ó 8 feet in surface. There was a row of arched loophol
es or windows about four feet wide and five feet high; spaced quite sy
mmetrically along the points of the star and at its inner angles, and 
with the bottoms about four feet from the glaciated surface. Looking t
hrough these, we could see that the masonry was fully five feet thick,
 that there were no partitions remaining within, and that there were t
races of banded carvings or bas-reliefs on the interior walls; facts w
e had indeed guessed before, when flying low over this rampart and oth
ers like it. Though lower parts must have originally existed, all trac
es of such things were now wholly obscured by the deep layer of ice an
d snow at this point. We crawled through one of the windows and vainly
 tried to decipher the nearly effaced mural designs, but did not attem
pt to disturb the glaciated floor. Our orientation flights had indicat
ed that many buildings in the city proper were less ice-choked, and th
at we might perhaps find wholly clear interiors leading down to the tr
ue ground level if we entered those structures still roofed at the top
. Before we left the rampart we photographed it carefully, and studied
 its mortarless Cyclopean masonry with complete bewilderment. We wishe
d that Pabodie were present, for his engineering knowledge might have 
helped us guess how such titanic blocks could have been handled in tha
t unbelievably remote age when the city and its outskirts were built u
p. The half-mile walk downhill to the actual city, with the upper wind
 shrieking vainly and savagely through the skyward peaks in the backgr
ound, was something whose smallest details will always remain engraved
 on my mind. Only in fantastic nightmares could any human beings but D
anforth and me conceive such optical effects. Between us and the churn
ing vapours of the west lay that monstrous tangle of dark stone towers
; its outr√© and incredible forms impressing us afresh at every new an
gle of vision. It was a mirage in solid stone, and were it not for the
 photographs I would still doubt that such a thing could be. The gener
al type of masonry was identical with that of the rampart we had exami
ned; but the extravagant shapes which this masonry took in its urban m
anifestations were past all description. Even the pictures illustrate 
only one or two phases of its infinite bizarrerie, endless variety, pr
eternatural massiveness, and utterly alien exoticism. There were geome
trical forms for which an Euclid could scarcely find a name‚Äîcones of
 all degrees of irregularity and truncation; terraces of every sort of
 provocative disproportion; shafts with odd bulbous enlargements; brok
en columns in curious groups; and five-pointed or five-ridged arrangem
ents of mad grotesqueness. As we drew nearer we could see beneath cert
ain transparent parts of the ice-sheet, and detect some of the tubular
 stone bridges that connected the crazily sprinkled structures at vari
ous heights. Of orderly streets there seemed to be none, the only broa
d open swath being a mile to the left, where the ancient river had dou
btless flowed through the town into the mountains. Our field-glasses s
hewed the external horizontal bands of nearly effaced sculptures and d
ot-groups to be very prevalent, and we could half imagine what the cit
y must once have looked like‚Äîeven though most of the roofs and tower
-tops had necessarily perished. As a whole, it had been a complex tang
le of twisted lanes and alleys; all of them deep canyons, and some lit
tle better than tunnels because of the overhanging masonry or overarch
ing bridges. Now, outspread below us, it loomed like a dream-phantasy 
against a westward mist through whose northern end the low, reddish an
tarctic sun of early afternoon was struggling to shine; and when for a
 moment that sun encountered a denser obstruction and plunged the scen
e into temporary shadow, the effect was subtly menacing in a way I can
 never hope to depict. Even the faint howling and piping of the unfelt
 wind in the great mountain passes behind us took on a wilder note of 
purposeful malignity. The last stage of our descent to the town was un
usually steep and abrupt, and a rock outcropping at the edge where the
 grade changed led us to think that an artificial terrace had once exi
sted there. Under the glaciation, we believed, there must be a flight 
of steps or its equivalent. When at last we plunged into the labyrinth
ine town itself, clambering over fallen masonry and shrinking from the
 oppressive nearness and dwarfing height of omnipresent crumbling and 
pitted walls, our sensations again became such that I marvel at the am
ount of self-control we retained. Danforth was frankly jumpy, and bega
n making some offensively irrelevant speculations about the horror at 
the camp‚Äîwhich I resented all the more because I could not help shar
ing certain conclusions forced upon us by many features of this morbid
 survival from nightmare antiquity. The speculations worked on his ima
gination, too; for in one place‚Äîwhere a debris-littered alley turned
 a sharp corner‚Äîhe insisted that he saw faint traces of ground marki
ngs which he did not like; whilst elsewhere he stopped to listen to a 
subtle imaginary sound from some undefined point‚Äîa muffled musical p
iping, he said, not unlike that of the wind in the mountain caves yet 
somehow disturbingly different. The ceaseless five-pointedness of the 
surrounding architecture and of the few distinguishable mural arabesqu
es had a dimly sinister suggestiveness we could not escape; and gave u
s a touch of terrible subconscious certainty concerning the primal ent
ities which had reared and dwelt in this unhallowed place. Nevertheles
s our scientific and adventurous souls were not wholly dead; and we me
chanically carried out our programme of chipping specimens from all th
e different rock types represented in the masonry. We wished a rather 
full set in order to draw better conclusions regarding the age of the 
place. Nothing in the great outer walls seemed to date from later than
 the Jurassic and Comanchian periods, nor was any piece of stone in th
e entire place of a greater recency than the Pliocene age. In stark ce
rtainty, we were wandering amidst a death which had reigned at least 5
00,000 years, and in all probability even longer. As we proceeded thro
ugh this maze of stone-shadowed twilight we stopped at all available a
pertures to study interiors and investigate entrance possibilities. So
me were above our reach, whilst others led only into ice-choked ruins 
as unroofed and barren as the rampart on the hill. One, though spaciou
s and inviting, opened on a seemingly bottomless abyss without visible
 means of descent. Now and then we had a chance to study the petrified
 wood of a surviving shutter, and were impressed by the fabulous antiq
uity implied in the still discernible grain. These things had come fro
m Mesozoic gymnosperms and conifers‚Äîespecially Cretaceous cycads‚Äîa
nd from fan-palms and early angiosperms of plainly Tertiary date. Noth
ing definitely later than the Pliocene could be discovered. In the pla
cing of these shutters‚Äîwhose edges shewed the former presence of que
er and long-vanished hinges‚Äîusage seemed to be varied; some being on
 the outer and some on the inner side of the deep embrasures. They see
med to have become wedged in place, thus surviving the rusting of thei
r former and probably metallic fixtures and fastenings. After a time w
e came across a row of windows‚Äîin the bulges of a colossal five-ridg
ed cone of undamaged apex‚Äîwhich led into a vast, well-preserved room
 with stone flooring; but these were too high in the room to permit of
 descent without a rope. We had a rope with us, but did not wish to bo
ther with this twenty-foot drop unless obliged to‚Äîespecially in this
 thin plateau air where great demands were made upon the heart action.
 This enormous room was probably a hall or concourse of some sort, and
 our electric torches shewed bold, distinct, and potentially startling
 sculptures arranged round the walls in broad, horizontal bands separa
ted by equally broad strips of conventional arabesques. We took carefu
l note of this spot, planning to enter here unless a more easily gaine
d interior were encountered. Finally, though, we did encounter exactly
 the opening we wished; an archway about six feet wide and ten feet hi
gh, marking the former end of an a√´rial bridge which had spanned an a
lley about five feet above the present level of glaciation. These arch
ways, of course, were flush with upper-story floors; and in this case 
one of the floors still existed. The building thus accessible was a se
ries of rectangular terraces on our left facing westward. That across 
the alley, where the other archway yawned, was a decrepit cylinder wit
h no windows and with a curious bulge about ten feet above the apertur
e. It was totally dark inside, and the archway seemed to open on a wel
l of illimitable emptiness. Heaped debris made the entrance to the vas
t left-hand building doubly easy, yet for a moment we hesitated before
 taking advantage of the long-wished chance. For though we had penetra
ted into this tangle of archaic mystery, it required fresh resolution 
to carry us actually inside a complete and surviving building of a fab
ulous elder world whose nature was becoming more and more hideously pl
ain to us. In the end, however, we made the plunge; and scrambled up o
ver the rubble into the gaping embrasure. The floor beyond was of grea
t slate slabs, and seemed to form the outlet of a long, high corridor 
with sculptured walls. Observing the many inner archways which led off
 from it, and realising the probable complexity of the nest of apartme
nts within, we decided that we must begin our system of hare-and-hound
 trail-blazing. Hitherto our compasses, together with frequent glimpse
s of the vast mountain-range between the towers in our rear, had been 
enough to prevent our losing our way; but from now on, the artificial 
substitute would be necessary. Accordingly we reduced our extra paper 
to shreds of suitable size, placed these in a bag to be carried by Dan
forth, and prepared to use them as economically as safety would allow.
 This method would probably gain us immunity from straying, since ther
e did not appear to be any strong air-currents inside the primordial m
asonry. If such should develop, or if our paper supply should give out
, we could of course fall back on the more secure though more tedious 
and retarding method of rock-chipping. Just how extensive a territory 
we had opened up, it was impossible to guess without a trial. The clos
e and frequent connexion of the different buildings made it likely tha
t we might cross from one to another on bridges underneath the ice exc
ept where impeded by local collapses and geologic rifts, for very litt
le glaciation seemed to have entered the massive constructions. Almost
 all the areas of transparent ice had revealed the submerged windows a
s tightly shuttered, as if the town had been left in that uniform stat
e until the glacial sheet came to crystallise the lower part for all s
ucceeding time. Indeed, one gained a curious impression that this plac
e had been deliberately closed and deserted in some dim, bygone aeon, 
rather than overwhelmed by any sudden calamity or even gradual decay. 
Had the coming of the ice been foreseen, and had a nameless population
 left en masse to seek a less doomed abode? The precise physiographic 
conditions attending the formation of the ice-sheet at this point woul
d have to wait for later solution. It had not, very plainly, been a gr
inding drive. Perhaps the pressure of accumulated snows had been respo
nsible; and perhaps some flood from the river, or from the bursting of
 some ancient glacial dam in the great range, had helped to create the
 special state now observable. Imagination could conceive almost anyth
ing in connexion with this place. VI. It would be cumbrous to give a d
etailed, consecutive account of our wanderings inside that cavernous, 
aeon-dead honeycomb of primal masonry; that monstrous lair of elder se
crets which now echoed for the first time, after uncounted epochs, to 
the tread of human feet. This is especially true because so much of th
e horrible drama and revelation came from a mere study of the omnipres
ent mural carvings. Our flashlight photographs of those carvings will 
do much toward proving the truth of what we are now disclosing, and it
 is lamentable that we had not a larger film supply with us. As it was
, we made crude notebook sketches of certain salient features after al
l our films were used up. The building which we had entered was one of
 great size and elaborateness, and gave us an impressive notion of the
 architecture of that nameless geologic past. The inner partitions wer
e less massive than the outer walls, but on the lower levels were exce
llently preserved. Labyrinthine complexity, involving curiously irregu
lar differences in floor levels, characterised the entire arrangement;
 and we should certainly have been lost at the very outset but for the
 trail of torn paper left behind us. We decided to explore the more de
crepit upper parts first of all, hence climbed aloft in the maze for a
 distance of some 100 feet, to where the topmost tier of chambers yawn
ed snowily and ruinously open to the polar sky. Ascent was effected ov
er the steep, transversely ribbed stone ramps or inclined planes which
 everywhere served in lieu of stairs. The rooms we encountered were of
 all imaginable shapes and proportions, ranging from five-pointed star
s to triangles and perfect cubes. It might be safe to say that their g
eneral average was about 30 √ó 30 feet in floor area, and 20 feet in h
eight; though many larger apartments existed. After thoroughly examini
ng the upper regions and the glacial level we descended story by story
 into the submerged part, where indeed we soon saw we were in a contin
uous maze of connected chambers and passages probably leading over unl
imited areas outside this particular building. The Cyclopean massivene
ss and giganticism of everything about us became curiously oppressive;
 and there was something vaguely but deeply unhuman in all the contour
s, dimensions, proportions, decorations, and constructional nuances of
 the blasphemously archaic stonework. We soon realised from what the c
arvings revealed that this monstrous city was many million years old. 
We cannot yet explain the engineering principles used in the anomalous
 balancing and adjustment of the vast rock masses, though the function
 of the arch was clearly much relied on. The rooms we visited were who
lly bare of all portable contents, a circumstance which sustained our 
belief in the city‚Äôs deliberate desertion. The prime decorative feat
ure was the almost universal system of mural sculpture; which tended t
o run in continuous horizontal bands three feet wide and arranged from
 floor to ceiling in alternation with bands of equal width given over 
to geometrical arabesques. There were exceptions to this rule of arran
gement, but its preponderance was overwhelming. Often, however, a seri
es of smooth cartouches containing oddly patterned groups of dots woul
d be sunk along one of the arabesque bands. The technique, we soon saw
, was mature, accomplished, and aesthetically evolved to the highest d
egree of civilised mastery; though utterly alien in every detail to an
y known art tradition of the human race. In delicacy of execution no s
culpture I have ever seen could approach it. The minutest details of e
laborate vegetation, or of animal life, were rendered with astonishing
 vividness despite the bold scale of the carvings; whilst the conventi
onal designs were marvels of skilful intricacy. The arabesques display
ed a profound use of mathematical principles, and were made up of obsc
urely symmetrical curves and angles based on the quantity of five. The
 pictorial bands followed a highly formalised tradition, and involved 
a peculiar treatment of perspective; but had an artistic force that mo
ved us profoundly notwithstanding the intervening gulf of vast geologi
c periods. Their method of design hinged on a singular juxtaposition o
f the cross-section with the two-dimensional silhouette, and embodied 
an analytical psychology beyond that of any known race of antiquity. I
t is useless to try to compare this art with any represented in our mu
seums. Those who see our photographs will probably find its closest an
alogue in certain grotesque conceptions of the most daring futurists. 
The arabesque tracery consisted altogether of depressed lines whose de
pth on unweathered walls varied from one to two inches. When cartouche
s with dot-groups appeared‚Äîevidently as inscriptions in some unknown
 and primordial language and alphabet‚Äîthe depression of the smooth s
urface was perhaps an inch and a half, and of the dots perhaps a half-
inch more. The pictorial bands were in counter-sunk low relief, their 
background being depressed about two inches from the original wall sur
face. In some specimens marks of a former colouration could be detecte
d, though for the most part the untold aeons had disintegrated and ban
ished any pigments which may have been applied. The more one studied t
he marvellous technique the more one admired the things. Beneath their
 strict conventionalisation one could grasp the minute and accurate ob
servation and graphic skill of the artists; and indeed, the very conve
ntions themselves served to symbolise and accentuate the real essence 
or vital differentiation of every object delineated. We felt, too, tha
t besides these recognisable excellences there were others lurking bey
ond the reach of our perceptions. Certain touches here and there gave 
vague hints of latent symbols and stimuli which another mental and emo
tional background, and a fuller or different sensory equipment, might 
have made of profound and poignant significance to us. The subject-mat
ter of the sculptures obviously came from the life of the vanished epo
ch of their creation, and contained a large proportion of evident hist
ory. It is this abnormal historic-mindedness of the primal race‚Äîa ch
ance circumstance operating, through coincidence, miraculously in our 
favour‚Äîwhich made the carvings so awesomely informative to us, and w
hich caused us to place their photography and transcription above all 
other considerations. In certain rooms the dominant arrangement was va
ried by the presence of maps, astronomical charts, and other scientifi
c designs on an enlarged scale‚Äîthese things giving a naive and terri
ble corroboration to what we gathered from the pictorial friezes and d
adoes. In hinting at what the whole revealed, I can only hope that my 
account will not arouse a curiosity greater than sane caution on the p
art of those who believe me at all. It would be tragic if any were to 
be allured to that realm of death and horror by the very warning meant
 to discourage them. Interrupting these sculptured walls were high win
dows and massive twelve-foot doorways; both now and then retaining the
 petrified wooden planks‚Äîelaborately carved and polished‚Äîof the ac
tual shutters and doors. All metal fixtures had long ago vanished, but
 some of the doors remained in place and had to be forced aside as we 
progressed from room to room. Window-frames with odd transparent panes
‚Äîmostly elliptical‚Äîsurvived here and there, though in no considera
ble quantity. There were also frequent niches of great magnitude, gene
rally empty, but once in a while containing some bizarre object carved
 from green soapstone which was either broken or perhaps held too infe
rior to warrant removal. Other apertures were undoubtedly connected wi
th bygone mechanical facilities‚Äîheating, lighting, and the like‚Äîof
 a sort suggested in many of the carvings. Ceilings tended to be plain
, but had sometimes been inlaid with green soapstone or other tiles, m
ostly fallen now. Floors were also paved with such tiles, though plain
 stonework predominated. As I have said, all furniture and other movea
bles were absent; but the sculptures gave a clear idea of the strange 
devices which had once filled these tomb-like, echoing rooms. Above th
e glacial sheet the floors were generally thick with detritus, litter,
 and debris; but farther down this condition decreased. In some of the
 lower chambers and corridors there was little more than gritty dust o
r ancient incrustations, while occasional areas had an uncanny air of 
newly swept immaculateness. Of course, where rifts or collapses had oc
curred, the lower levels were as littered as the upper ones. A central
 court‚Äîas in other structures we had seen from the air‚Äîsaved the i
nner regions from total darkness; so that we seldom had to use our ele
ctric torches in the upper rooms except when studying sculptured detai
ls. Below the ice-cap, however, the twilight deepened; and in many par
ts of the tangled ground level there was an approach to absolute black
ness. To form even a rudimentary idea of our thoughts and feelings as 
we penetrated this aeon-silent maze of unhuman masonry one must correl
ate a hopelessly bewildering chaos of fugitive moods, memories, and im
pressions. The sheer appalling antiquity and lethal desolation of the 
place were enough to overwhelm almost any sensitive person, but added 
to these elements were the recent unexplained horror at the camp, and 
the revelations all too soon effected by the terrible mural sculptures
 around us. The moment we came upon a perfect section of carving, wher
e no ambiguity of interpretation could exist, it took only a brief stu
dy to give us the hideous truth‚Äîa truth which it would be naive to c
laim Danforth and I had not independently suspected before, though we 
had carefully refrained from even hinting it to each other. There coul
d now be no further merciful doubt about the nature of the beings whic
h had built and inhabited this monstrous dead city millions of years a
go, when man‚Äôs ancestors were primitive archaic mammals, and vast di
nosaurs roamed the tropical steppes of Europe and Asia. We had previou
sly clung to a desperate alternative and insisted‚Äîeach to himself‚Äî
that the omnipresence of the five-pointed motif meant only some cultur
al or religious exaltation of the Archaean natural object which had so
 patently embodied the quality of five-pointedness; as the decorative 
motifs of Minoan Crete exalted the sacred bull, those of Egypt the sca
rabaeus, those of Rome the wolf and the eagle, and those of various sa
vage tribes some chosen totem-animal. But this lone refuge was now str
ipped from us, and we were forced to face definitely the reason-shakin
g realisation which the reader of these pages has doubtless long ago a
nticipated. I can scarcely bear to write it down in black and white ev
en now, but perhaps that will not be necessary. The things once rearin
g and dwelling in this frightful masonry in the age of dinosaurs were 
not indeed dinosaurs, but far worse. Mere dinosaurs were new and almos
t brainless objects‚Äîbut the builders of the city were wise and old, 
and had left certain traces in rocks even then laid down well-nigh a t
housand million years . . . rocks laid down before the true life of ea
rth had advanced beyond plastic groups of cells . . . rocks laid down 
before the true life of earth had existed at all. They were the makers
 and enslavers of that life, and above all doubt the originals of the 
fiendish elder myths which things like the Pnakotic Manuscripts and th
e Necronomicon affrightedly hint about. They were the Great Old Ones t
hat had filtered down from the stars when earth was young‚Äîthe beings
 whose substance an alien evolution had shaped, and whose powers were 
such as this planet had never bred. And to think that only the day bef
ore Danforth and I had actually looked upon fragments of their millenn
ially fossilised substance . . . and that poor Lake and his party had 
seen their complete outlines. . . . It is of course impossible for me 
to relate in proper order the stages by which we picked up what we kno
w of that monstrous chapter of pre-human life. After the first shock o
f the certain revelation we had to pause a while to recuperate, and it
 was fully three o‚Äôclock before we got started on our actual tour of
 systematic research. The sculptures in the building we entered were o
f relatively late date‚Äîperhaps two million years ago‚Äîas checked up
 by geological, biological, and astronomical features; and embodied an
 art which would be called decadent in comparison with that of specime
ns we found in older buildings after crossing bridges under the glacia
l sheet. One edifice hewn from the solid rock seemed to go back forty 
or possibly even fifty million years‚Äîto the lower Eocene or upper Cr
etaceous‚Äîand contained bas-reliefs of an artistry surpassing anythin
g else, with one tremendous exception, that we encountered. That was, 
we have since agreed, the oldest domestic structure we traversed. Were
 it not for the support of those flashlights soon to be made public, I
 would refrain from telling what I found and inferred, lest I be confi
ned as a madman. Of course, the infinitely early parts of the patchwor
k tale‚Äîrepresenting the pre-terrestrial life of the star-headed bein
gs on other planets, and in other galaxies, and in other universes‚Äîc
an readily be interpreted as the fantastic mythology of those beings t
hemselves; yet such parts sometimes involved designs and diagrams so u
ncannily close to the latest findings of mathematics and astrophysics 
that I scarcely know what to think. Let others judge when they see the
 photographs I shall publish. Naturally, no one set of carvings which 
we encountered told more than a fraction of any connected story; nor d
id we even begin to come upon the various stages of that story in thei
r proper order. Some of the vast rooms were independent units so far a
s their designs were concerned, whilst in other cases a continuous chr
onicle would be carried through a series of rooms and corridors. The b
est of the maps and diagrams were on the walls of a frightful abyss be
low even the ancient ground level‚Äîa cavern perhaps 200 feet square a
nd sixty feet high, which had almost undoubtedly been an educational c
entre of some sort. There were many provoking repetitions of the same 
material in different rooms and buildings; since certain chapters of e
xperience, and certain summaries or phases of racial history, had evid
ently been favourites with different decorators or dwellers. Sometimes
, though, variant versions of the same theme proved useful in settling
 debatable points and filling in gaps. I still wonder that we deduced 
so much in the short time at our disposal. Of course, we even now have
 only the barest outline; and much of that was obtained later on from 
a study of the photographs and sketches we made. It may be the effect 
of this later study‚Äîthe revived memories and vague impressions actin
g in conjunction with his general sensitiveness and with that final su
pposed horror-glimpse whose essence he will not reveal even to me‚Äîwh
ich has been the immediate source of Danforth‚Äôs present breakdown. B
ut it had to be; for we could not issue our warning intelligently with
out the fullest possible information, and the issuance of that warning
 is a prime necessity. Certain lingering influences in that unknown an
tarctic world of disordered time and alien natural law make it imperat
ive that further exploration be discouraged. VII. The full story, so f
ar as deciphered, will shortly appear in an official bulletin of Miska
tonic University. Here I shall sketch only the salient high lights in 
a formless, rambling way. Myth or otherwise, the sculptures told of th
e coming of those star-headed things to the nascent, lifeless earth ou
t of cosmic space‚Äîtheir coming, and the coming of many other alien e
ntities such as at certain times embark upon spatial pioneering. They 
seemed able to traverse the interstellar ether on their vast membraneo
us wings‚Äîthus oddly confirming some curious hill folklore long ago t
old me by an antiquarian colleague. They had lived under the sea a goo
d deal, building fantastic cities and fighting terrific battles with n
ameless adversaries by means of intricate devices employing unknown pr
inciples of energy. Evidently their scientific and mechanical knowledg
e far surpassed man‚Äôs today, though they made use of its more widesp
read and elaborate forms only when obliged to. Some of the sculptures 
suggested that they had passed through a stage of mechanised life on o
ther planets, but had receded upon finding its effects emotionally uns
atisfying. Their preternatural toughness of organisation and simplicit
y of natural wants made them peculiarly able to live on a high plane w
ithout the more specialised fruits of artificial manufacture, and even
 without garments except for occasional protection against the element
s. It was under the sea, at first for food and later for other purpose
s, that they first created earth-life‚Äîusing available substances acc
ording to long-known methods. The more elaborate experiments came afte
r the annihilation of various cosmic enemies. They had done the same t
hing on other planets; having manufactured not only necessary foods, b
ut certain multicellular protoplasmic masses capable of moulding their
 tissues into all sorts of temporary organs under hypnotic influence a
nd thereby forming ideal slaves to perform the heavy work of the commu
nity. These viscous masses were without doubt what Abdul Alhazred whis
pered about as the ‚Äúshoggoths‚Äù in his frightful Necronomicon, thou
gh even that mad Arab had not hinted that any existed on earth except 
in the dreams of those who had chewed a certain alkaloidal herb. When 
the star-headed Old Ones on this planet had synthesised their simple f
ood forms and bred a good supply of shoggoths, they allowed other cell
-groups to develop into other forms of animal and vegetable life for s
undry purposes; extirpating any whose presence became troublesome. Wit
h the aid of the shoggoths, whose expansions could be made to lift pro
digious weights, the small, low cities under the sea grew to vast and 
imposing labyrinths of stone not unlike those which later rose on land
. Indeed, the highly adaptable Old Ones had lived much on land in othe
r parts of the universe, and probably retained many traditions of land
 construction. As we studied the architecture of all these sculptured 
palaeogean cities, including that whose aeon-dead corridors we were ev
en then traversing, we were impressed by a curious coincidence which w
e have not yet tried to explain, even to ourselves. The tops of the bu
ildings, which in the actual city around us had of course been weather
ed into shapeless ruins ages ago, were clearly displayed in the bas-re
liefs; and shewed vast clusters of needle-like spires, delicate finial
s on certain cone and pyramid apexes, and tiers of thin, horizontal sc
alloped discs capping cylindrical shafts. This was exactly what we had
 seen in that monstrous and portentous mirage, cast by a dead city whe
nce such skyline features had been absent for thousands and tens of th
ousands of years, which loomed on our ignorant eyes across the unfatho
med mountains of madness as we first approached poor Lake‚Äôs ill-fate
d camp. Of the life of the Old Ones, both under the sea and after part
 of them migrated to land, volumes could be written. Those in shallow 
water had continued the fullest use of the eyes at the ends of their f
ive main head tentacles, and had practiced the arts of sculpture and o
f writing in quite the usual way‚Äîthe writing accomplished with a sty
lus on waterproof waxen surfaces. Those lower down in the ocean depths
, though they used a curious phosphorescent organism to furnish light,
 pieced out their vision with obscure special senses operating through
 the prismatic cilia on their heads‚Äîsenses which rendered all the Ol
d Ones partly independent of light in emergencies. Their forms of scul
pture and writing had changed curiously during the descent, embodying 
certain apparently chemical coating processes‚Äîprobably to secure pho
sphorescence‚Äîwhich the bas-reliefs could not make clear to us. The b
eings moved in the sea partly by swimming‚Äîusing the lateral crinoid 
arms‚Äîand partly by wriggling with the lower tier of tentacles contai
ning the pseudo-feet. Occasionally they accomplished long swoops with 
the auxiliary use of two or more sets of their fan-like folding wings.
 On land they locally used the pseudo-feet, but now and then flew to g
reat heights or over long distances with their wings. The many slender
 tentacles into which the crinoid arms branched were infinitely delica
te, flexible, strong, and accurate in muscular-nervous co√∂rdination; 
ensuring the utmost skill and dexterity in all artistic and other manu
al operations. The toughness of the things was almost incredible. Even
 the terrific pressures of the deepest sea-bottoms appeared powerless 
to harm them. Very few seemed to die at all except by violence, and th
eir burial-places were very limited. The fact that they covered their 
vertically inhumed dead with five-pointed inscribed mounds set up thou
ghts in Danforth and me which made a fresh pause and recuperation nece
ssary after the sculptures revealed it. The beings multiplied by means
 of spores‚Äîlike vegetable pteridophytes as Lake had suspected‚Äîbut 
owing to their prodigious toughness and longevity, and consequent lack
 of replacement needs, they did not encourage the large-scale developm
ent of new prothalli except when they had new regions to colonise. The
 young matured swiftly, and received an education evidently beyond any
 standard we can imagine. The prevailing intellectual and aesthetic li
fe was highly evolved, and produced a tenaciously enduring set of cust
oms and institutions which I shall describe more fully in my coming mo
nograph. These varied slightly according to sea or land residence, but
 had the same foundations and essentials. Though able, like vegetables
, to derive nourishment from inorganic substances; they vastly preferr
ed organic and especially animal food. They ate uncooked marine life u
nder the sea, but cooked their viands on land. They hunted game and ra
ised meat herds‚Äîslaughtering with sharp weapons whose odd marks on c
ertain fossil bones our expedition had noted. They resisted all ordina
ry temperatures marvellously; and in their natural state could live in
 water down to freezing. When the great chill of the Pleistocene drew 
on, however‚Äînearly a million years ago‚Äîthe land dwellers had to re
sort to special measures including artificial heating; until at last t
he deadly cold appears to have driven them back into the sea. For thei
r prehistoric flights through cosmic space, legend said, they had abso
rbed certain chemicals and became almost independent of eating, breath
ing, or heat conditions; but by the time of the great cold they had lo
st track of the method. In any case they could not have prolonged the 
artificial state indefinitely without harm. Being non-pairing and semi
-vegetable in structure, the Old Ones had no biological basis for the 
family phase of mammal life; but seemed to organise large households o
n the principles of comfortable space-utility and‚Äîas we deduced from
 the pictured occupations and diversions of co-dwellers‚Äîcongenial me
ntal association. In furnishing their homes they kept everything in th
e centre of the huge rooms, leaving all the wall spaces free for decor
ative treatment. Lighting, in the case of the land inhabitants, was ac
complished by a device probably electro-chemical in nature. Both on la
nd and under water they used curious tables, chairs, and couches like 
cylindrical frames‚Äîfor they rested and slept upright with folded-dow
n tentacles‚Äîand racks for the hinged sets of dotted surfaces forming
 their books. Government was evidently complex and probably socialisti
c, though no certainties in this regard could be deduced from the scul
ptures we saw. There was extensive commerce, both local and between di
fferent cities; certain small, flat counters, five-pointed and inscrib
ed, serving as money. Probably the smaller of the various greenish soa
pstones found by our expedition were pieces of such currency. Though t
he culture was mainly urban, some agriculture and much stock-raising e
xisted. Mining and a limited amount of manufacturing were also practic
ed. Travel was very frequent, but permanent migration seemed relativel
y rare except for the vast colonising movements by which the race expa
nded. For personal locomotion no external aid was used; since in land,
 air, and water movement alike the Old Ones seemed to possess excessiv
ely vast capacities for speed. Loads, however, were drawn by beasts of
 burden‚Äîshoggoths under the sea, and a curious variety of primitive 
vertebrates in the later years of land existence. These vertebrates, a
s well as an infinity of other life-forms‚Äîanimal and vegetable, mari
ne, terrestrial, and a√´rial‚Äîwere the products of unguided evolution
 acting on life-cells made by the Old Ones but escaping beyond their r
adius of attention. They had been suffered to develop unchecked becaus
e they had not come in conflict with the dominant beings. Bothersome f
orms, of course, were mechanically exterminated. It interested us to s
ee in some of the very last and most decadent sculptures a shambling p
rimitive mammal, used sometimes for food and sometimes as an amusing b
uffoon by the land dwellers, whose vaguely simian and human foreshadow
ings were unmistakable. In the building of land cities the huge stone 
blocks of the high towers were generally lifted by vast-winged pteroda
ctyls of a species heretofore unknown to palaeontology. The persistenc
e with which the Old Ones survived various geologic changes and convul
sions of the earth‚Äôs crust was little short of miraculous. Though fe
w or none of their first cities seem to have remained beyond the Archa
ean age, there was no interruption in their civilisation or in the tra
nsmission of their records. Their original place of advent to the plan
et was the Antarctic Ocean, and it is likely that they came not long a
fter the matter forming the moon was wrenched from the neighbouring So
uth Pacific. According to one of the sculptured maps, the whole globe 
was then under water, with stone cities scattered farther and farther 
from the antarctic as aeons passed. Another map shews a vast bulk of d
ry land around the south pole, where it is evident that some of the be
ings made experimental settlements though their main centres were tran
sferred to the nearest sea-bottom. Later maps, which display this land
 mass as cracking and drifting, and sending certain detached parts nor
thward, uphold in a striking way the theories of continental drift lat
ely advanced by Taylor, Wegener, and Joly. With the upheaval of new la
nd in the South Pacific tremendous events began. Some of the marine ci
ties were hopelessly shattered, yet that was not the worst misfortune.
 Another race‚Äîa land race of beings shaped like octopi and probably 
corresponding to the fabulous pre-human spawn of Cthulhu‚Äîsoon began 
filtering down from cosmic infinity and precipitated a monstrous war w
hich for a time drove the Old Ones wholly back to the sea‚Äîa colossal
 blow in view of the increasing land settlements. Later peace was made
, and the new lands were given to the Cthulhu spawn whilst the Old One
s held the sea and the older lands. New land cities were founded‚Äîthe
 greatest of them in the antarctic, for this region of first arrival w
as sacred. From then on, as before, the antarctic remained the centre 
of the Old Ones‚Äô civilisation, and all the discoverable cities built
 there by the Cthulhu spawn were blotted out. Then suddenly the lands 
of the Pacific sank again, taking with them the frightful stone city o
f R‚Äôlyeh and all the cosmic octopi, so that the Old Ones were again 
supreme on the planet except for one shadowy fear about which they did
 not like to speak. At a rather later age their cities dotted all the 
land and water areas of the globe‚Äîhence the recommendation in my com
ing monograph that some archaeologist make systematic borings with Pab
odie‚Äôs type of apparatus in certain widely separated regions. The st
eady trend down the ages was from water to land; a movement encouraged
 by the rise of new land masses, though the ocean was never wholly des
erted. Another cause of the landward movement was the new difficulty i
n breeding and managing the shoggoths upon which successful sea-life d
epended. With the march of time, as the sculptures sadly confessed, th
e art of creating new life from inorganic matter had been lost; so tha
t the Old Ones had to depend on the moulding of forms already in exist
ence. On land the great reptiles proved highly tractable; but the shog
goths of the sea, reproducing by fission and acquiring a dangerous deg
ree of accidental intelligence, presented for a time a formidable prob
lem. They had always been controlled through the hypnotic suggestion o
f the Old Ones, and had modelled their tough plasticity into various u
seful temporary limbs and organs; but now their self-modelling powers 
were sometimes exercised independently, and in various imitative forms
 implanted by past suggestion. They had, it seems, developed a semi-st
able brain whose separate and occasionally stubborn volition echoed th
e will of the Old Ones without always obeying it. Sculptured images of
 these shoggoths filled Danforth and me with horror and loathing. They
 were normally shapeless entities composed of a viscous jelly which lo
oked like an agglutination of bubbles; and each averaged about fifteen
 feet in diameter when a sphere. They had, however, a constantly shift
ing shape and volume; throwing out temporary developments or forming a
pparent organs of sight, hearing, and speech in imitation of their mas
ters, either spontaneously or according to suggestion. They seem to ha
ve become peculiarly intractable toward the middle of the Permian age,
 perhaps 150 million years ago, when a veritable war of re-subjugation
 was waged upon them by the marine Old Ones. Pictures of this war, and
 of the headless, slime-coated fashion in which the shoggoths typicall
y left their slain victims, held a marvellously fearsome quality despi
te the intervening abyss of untold ages. The Old Ones had used curious
 weapons of molecular disturbance against the rebel entities, and in t
he end had achieved a complete victory. Thereafter the sculptures shew
ed a period in which shoggoths were tamed and broken by armed Old Ones
 as the wild horses of the American west were tamed by cowboys. Though
 during the rebellion the shoggoths had shewn an ability to live out o
f water, this transition was not encouraged; since their usefulness on
 land would hardly have been commensurate with the trouble of their ma
nagement. During the Jurassic age the Old Ones met fresh adversity in 
the form of a new invasion from outer space‚Äîthis time by half-fungou
s, half-crustacean creatures from a planet identifiable as the remote 
and recently discovered Pluto; creatures undoubtedly the same as those
 figuring in certain whispered hill legends of the north, and remember
ed in the Himalayas as the Mi-Go, or Abominable Snow-Men. To fight the
se beings the Old Ones attempted, for the first time since their terre
ne advent, to sally forth again into the planetary ether; but despite 
all traditional preparations found it no longer possible to leave the 
earth‚Äôs atmosphere. Whatever the old secret of interstellar travel h
ad been, it was now definitely lost to the race. In the end the Mi-Go 
drove the Old Ones out of all the northern lands, though they were pow
erless to disturb those in the sea. Little by little the slow retreat 
of the elder race to their original antarctic habitat was beginning. I
t was curious to note from the pictured battles that both the Cthulhu 
spawn and the Mi-Go seem to have been composed of matter more widely d
ifferent from that which we know than was the substance of the Old One
s. They were able to undergo transformations and reintegrations imposs
ible for their adversaries, and seem therefore to have originally come
 from even remoter gulfs of cosmic space. The Old Ones, but for their 
abnormal toughness and peculiar vital properties, were strictly materi
al, and must have had their absolute origin within the known space-tim
e continuum; whereas the first sources of the other beings can only be
 guessed at with bated breath. All this, of course, assuming that the 
non-terrestrial linkages and the anomalies ascribed to the invading fo
es are not pure mythology. Conceivably, the Old Ones might have invent
ed a cosmic framework to account for their occasional defeats; since h
istorical interest and pride obviously formed their chief psychologica
l element. It is significant that their annals failed to mention many 
advanced and potent races of beings whose mighty cultures and towering
 cities figure persistently in certain obscure legends. The changing s
tate of the world through long geologic ages appeared with startling v
ividness in many of the sculptured maps and scenes. In certain cases e
xisting science will require revision, while in other cases its bold d
eductions are magnificently confirmed. As I have said, the hypothesis 
of Taylor, Wegener, and Joly that all the continents are fragments of 
an original antarctic land mass which cracked from centrifugal force a
nd drifted apart over a technically viscous lower surface‚Äîan hypothe
sis suggested by such things as the complementary outlines of Africa a
nd South America, and the way the great mountain chains are rolled and
 shoved up‚Äîreceives striking support from this uncanny source. Maps 
evidently shewing the Carboniferous world of an hundred million or mor
e years ago displayed significant rifts and chasms destined later to s
eparate Africa from the once continuous realms of Europe (then the Val
usia of hellish primal legend), Asia, the Americas, and the antarctic 
continent. Other charts‚Äîand most significantly one in connexion with
 the founding fifty million years ago of the vast dead city around us‚
Äîshewed all the present continents well differentiated. And in the la
test discoverable specimen‚Äîdating perhaps from the Pliocene age‚Äîth
e approximate world of today appeared quite clearly despite the linkag
e of Alaska with Siberia, of North America with Europe through Greenla
nd, and of South America with the antarctic continent through Graham L
and. In the Carboniferous map the whole globe‚Äîocean floor and rifted
 land mass alike‚Äîbore symbols of the Old Ones‚Äô vast stone cities, 
but in the later charts the gradual recession toward the antarctic bec
ame very plain. The final Pliocene specimen shewed no land cities exce
pt on the antarctic continent and the tip of South America, nor any oc
ean cities north of the fiftieth parallel of South Latitude. Knowledge
 and interest in the northern world, save for a study of coast-lines p
robably made during long exploration flights on those fan-like membran
eous wings, had evidently declined to zero among the Old Ones. Destruc
tion of cities through the upthrust of mountains, the centrifugal rend
ing of continents, the seismic convulsions of land or sea-bottom, and 
other natural causes was a matter of common record; and it was curious
 to observe how fewer and fewer replacements were made as the ages wor
e on. The vast dead megalopolis that yawned around us seemed to be the
 last general centre of the race; built early in the Cretaceous age af
ter a titanic earth-buckling had obliterated a still vaster predecesso
r not far distant. It appeared that this general region was the most s
acred spot of all, where reputedly the first Old Ones had settled on a
 primal sea-bottom. In the new city‚Äîmany of whose features we could 
recognise in the sculptures, but which stretched fully an hundred mile
s along the mountain-range in each direction beyond the farthest limit
s of our a√´rial survey‚Äîthere were reputed to be preserved certain s
acred stones forming part of the first sea-bottom city, which were thr
ust up to light after long epochs in the course of the general crumpli
ng of strata. VIII. Naturally, Danforth and I studied with especial in
terest and a peculiarly personal sense of awe everything pertaining to
 the immediate district in which we were. Of this local material there
 was naturally a vast abundance; and on the tangled ground level of th
e city we were lucky enough to find a house of very late date whose wa
lls, though somewhat damaged by a neighbouring rift, contained sculptu
res of decadent workmanship carrying the story of the region much beyo
nd the period of the Pliocene map whence we derived our last general g
limpse of the pre-human world. This was the last place we examined in 
detail, since what we found there gave us a fresh immediate objective.
 Certainly, we were in one of the strangest, weirdest, and most terrib
le of all the corners of earth‚Äôs globe. Of all existing lands it was
 infinitely the most ancient; and the conviction grew upon us that thi
s hideous upland must indeed be the fabled nightmare plateau of Leng w
hich even the mad author of the Necronomicon was reluctant to discuss.
 The great mountain chain was tremendously long‚Äîstarting as a low ra
nge at Luitpold Land on the coast of Weddell Sea and virtually crossin
g the entire continent. The really high part stretched in a mighty arc
 from about Latitude 82¬∞, E. Longitude 60¬∞ to Latitude 70¬∞, E. Long
itude 115¬∞, with its concave side toward our camp and its seaward end
 in the region of that long, ice-locked coast whose hills were glimpse
d by Wilkes and Mawson at the Antarctic Circle. Yet even more monstrou
s exaggerations of Nature seemed disturbingly close at hand. I have sa
id that these peaks are higher than the Himalayas, but the sculptures 
forbid me to say that they are earth‚Äôs highest. That grim honour is 
beyond doubt reserved for something which half the sculptures hesitate
d to record at all, whilst others approached it with obvious repugnanc
e and trepidation. It seems that there was one part of the ancient lan
d‚Äîthe first part that ever rose from the waters after the earth had 
flung off the moon and the Old Ones had seeped down from the stars‚Äîw
hich had come to be shunned as vaguely and namelessly evil. Cities bui
lt there had crumbled before their time, and had been found suddenly d
eserted. Then when the first great earth-buckling had convulsed the re
gion in the Comanchian age, a frightful line of peaks had shot suddenl
y up amidst the most appalling din and chaos‚Äîand earth had received 
her loftiest and most terrible mountains. If the scale of the carvings
 was correct, these abhorred things must have been much over 40,000 fe
et high‚Äîradically vaster than even the shocking mountains of madness
 we had crossed. They extended, it appeared, from about Latitude 77¬∞,
 E. Longitude 70¬∞ to Latitude 70¬∞, E. Longitude 100¬∞‚Äîless than 30
0 miles away from the dead city, so that we would have spied their dre
aded summits in the dim western distance had it not been for that vagu
e opalescent haze. Their northern end must likewise be visible from th
e long Antarctic Circle coast-line at Queen Mary Land. Some of the Old
 Ones, in the decadent days, had made strange prayers to those mountai
ns; but none ever went near them or dared to guess what lay beyond. No
 human eye had ever seen them, and as I studied the emotions conveyed 
in the carvings I prayed that none ever might. There are protecting hi
lls along the coast beyond them‚ÄîQueen Mary and Kaiser Wilhelm Lands‚
Äîand I thank heaven no one has been able to land and climb those hill
s. I am not as sceptical about old tales and fears as I used to be, an
d I do not laugh now at the pre-human sculptor‚Äôs notion that lightni
ng paused meaningfully now and then at each of the brooding crests, an
d that an unexplained glow shone from one of those terrible pinnacles 
all through the long polar night. There may be a very real and very mo
nstrous meaning in the old Pnakotic whispers about Kadath in the Cold 
Waste. But the terrain close at hand was hardly less strange, even if 
less namelessly accursed. Soon after the founding of the city the grea
t mountain-range became the seat of the principal temples, and many ca
rvings shewed what grotesque and fantastic towers had pierced the sky 
where now we saw only the curiously clinging cubes and ramparts. In th
e course of ages the caves had appeared, and had been shaped into adju
ncts of the temples. With the advance of still later epochs all the li
mestone veins of the region were hollowed out by ground waters, so tha
t the mountains, the foothills, and the plains below them were a verit
able network of connected caverns and galleries. Many graphic sculptur
es told of explorations deep underground, and of the final discovery o
f the Stygian sunless sea that lurked at earth‚Äôs bowels. This vast n
ighted gulf had undoubtedly been worn by the great river which flowed 
down from the nameless and horrible westward mountains, and which had 
formerly turned at the base of the Old Ones‚Äô range and flowed beside
 that chain into the Indian Ocean between Budd and Totten Lands on Wil
kes‚Äôs coast-line. Little by little it had eaten away the limestone h
ill base at its turning, till at last its sapping currents reached the
 caverns of the ground waters and joined with them in digging a deeper
 abyss. Finally its whole bulk emptied into the hollow hills and left 
the old bed toward the ocean dry. Much of the later city as we now fou
nd it had been built over that former bed. The Old Ones, understanding
 what had happened, and exercising their always keen artistic sense, h
ad carved into ornate pylons those headlands of the foothills where th
e great stream began its descent into eternal darkness. This river, on
ce crossed by scores of noble stone bridges, was plainly the one whose
 extinct course we had seen in our a√´roplane survey. Its position in 
different carvings of the city helped us to orient ourselves to the sc
ene as it had been at various stages of the region‚Äôs age-long, aeon-
dead history; so that we were able to sketch a hasty but careful map o
f the salient features‚Äîsquares, important buildings, and the like‚Äî
for guidance in further explorations. We could soon reconstruct in fan
cy the whole stupendous thing as it was a million or ten million or fi
fty million years ago, for the sculptures told us exactly what the bui
ldings and mountains and squares and suburbs and landscape setting and
 luxuriant Tertiary vegetation had looked like. It must have had a mar
vellous and mystic beauty, and as I thought of it I almost forgot the 
clammy sense of sinister oppression with which the city‚Äôs inhuman ag
e and massiveness and deadness and remoteness and glacial twilight had
 choked and weighed on my spirit. Yet according to certain carvings th
e denizens of that city had themselves known the clutch of oppressive 
terror; for there was a sombre and recurrent type of scene in which th
e Old Ones were shewn in the act of recoiling affrightedly from some o
bject‚Äînever allowed to appear in the design‚Äîfound in the great riv
er and indicated as having been washed down through waving, vine-drape
d cycad-forests from those horrible westward mountains. It was only in
 the one late-built house with the decadent carvings that we obtained 
any foreshadowing of the final calamity leading to the city‚Äôs desert
ion. Undoubtedly there must have been many sculptures of the same age 
elsewhere, even allowing for the slackened energies and aspirations of
 a stressful and uncertain period; indeed, very certain evidence of th
e existence of others came to us shortly afterward. But this was the f
irst and only set we directly encountered. We meant to look farther la
ter on; but as I have said, immediate conditions dictated another pres
ent objective. There would, though, have been a limit‚Äîfor after all 
hope of a long future occupancy of the place had perished among the Ol
d Ones, there could not but have been a complete cessation of mural de
coration. The ultimate blow, of course, was the coming of the great co
ld which once held most of the earth in thrall, and which has never de
parted from the ill-fated poles‚Äîthe great cold that, at the world‚Äô
s other extremity, put an end to the fabled lands of Lomar and Hyperbo
rea. Just when this tendency began in the antarctic it would be hard t
o say in terms of exact years. Nowadays we set the beginning of the ge
neral glacial periods at a distance of about 500,000 years from the pr
esent, but at the poles the terrible scourge must have commenced much 
earlier. All quantitative estimates are partly guesswork; but it is qu
ite likely that the decadent sculptures were made considerably less th
an a million years ago, and that the actual desertion of the city was 
complete long before the conventional opening of the Pleistocene‚Äî500
,000 years ago‚Äîas reckoned in terms of the earth‚Äôs whole surface. 
In the decadent sculptures there were signs of thinner vegetation ever
ywhere, and of a decreased country life on the part of the Old Ones. H
eating devices were shewn in the houses, and winter travellers were re
presented as muffled in protective fabrics. Then we saw a series of ca
rtouches (the continuous band arrangement being frequently interrupted
 in these late carvings) depicting a constantly growing migration to t
he nearest refuges of greater warmth‚Äîsome fleeing to cities under th
e sea off the far-away coast, and some clambering down through network
s of limestone caverns in the hollow hills to the neighbouring black a
byss of subterrene waters. In the end it seems to have been the neighb
ouring abyss which received the greatest colonisation. This was partly
 due, no doubt, to the traditional sacredness of this especial region;
 but may have been more conclusively determined by the opportunities i
t gave for continuing the use of the great temples on the honeycombed 
mountains, and for retaining the vast land city as a place of summer r
esidence and base of communication with various mines. The linkage of 
old and new abodes was made more effective by means of several grading
s and improvements along the connecting routes, including the chiselli
ng of numerous direct tunnels from the ancient metropolis to the black
 abyss‚Äîsharply down-pointing tunnels whose mouths we carefully drew,
 according to our most thoughtful estimates, on the guide map we were 
compiling. It was obvious that at least two of these tunnels lay withi
n a reasonable exploring distance of where we were; both being on the 
mountainward edge of the city, one less than a quarter-mile toward the
 ancient river-course, and the other perhaps twice that distance in th
e opposite direction. The abyss, it seems, had shelving shores of dry 
land at certain places; but the Old Ones built their new city under wa
ter‚Äîno doubt because of its greater certainty of uniform warmth. The
 depth of the hidden sea appears to have been very great, so that the 
earth‚Äôs internal heat could ensure its habitability for an indefinit
e period. The beings seem to have had no trouble in adapting themselve
s to part-time‚Äîand eventually, of course, whole-time‚Äîresidence und
er water; since they had never allowed their gill systems to atrophy. 
There were many sculptures which shewed how they had always frequently
 visited their submarine kinsfolk elsewhere, and how they had habitual
ly bathed on the deep bottom of their great river. The darkness of inn
er earth could likewise have been no deterrent to a race accustomed to
 long antarctic nights. Decadent though their style undoubtedly was, t
hese latest carvings had a truly epic quality where they told of the b
uilding of the new city in the cavern sea. The Old Ones had gone about
 it scientifically; quarrying insoluble rocks from the heart of the ho
neycombed mountains, and employing expert workers from the nearest sub
marine city to perform the construction according to the best methods.
 These workers brought with them all that was necessary to establish t
he new venture‚Äîshoggoth-tissue from which to breed stone-lifters and
 subsequent beasts of burden for the cavern city, and other protoplasm
ic matter to mould into phosphorescent organisms for lighting purposes
. At last a mighty metropolis rose on the bottom of that Stygian sea; 
its architecture much like that of the city above, and its workmanship
 displaying relatively little decadence because of the precise mathema
tical element inherent in building operations. The newly bred shoggoth
s grew to enormous size and singular intelligence, and were represente
d as taking and executing orders with marvellous quickness. They seeme
d to converse with the Old Ones by mimicking their voices‚Äîa sort of 
musical piping over a wide range, if poor Lake‚Äôs dissection had indi
cated aright‚Äîand to work more from spoken commands than from hypnoti
c suggestions as in earlier times. They were, however, kept in admirab
le control. The phosphorescent organisms supplied light with vast effe
ctiveness, and doubtless atoned for the loss of the familiar polar aur
oras of the outer-world night. Art and decoration were pursued, though
 of course with a certain decadence. The Old Ones seemed to realise th
is falling off themselves; and in many cases anticipated the policy of
 Constantine the Great by transplanting especially fine blocks of anci
ent carving from their land city, just as the emperor, in a similar ag
e of decline, stripped Greece and Asia of their finest art to give his
 new Byzantine capital greater splendours than its own people could cr
eate. That the transfer of sculptured blocks had not been more extensi
ve, was doubtless owing to the fact that the land city was not at firs
t wholly abandoned. By the time total abandonment did occur‚Äîand it s
urely must have occurred before the polar Pleistocene was far advanced
‚Äîthe Old Ones had perhaps become satisfied with their decadent art‚Ä
îor had ceased to recognise the superior merit of the older carvings. 
At any rate, the aeon-silent ruins around us had certainly undergone n
o wholesale sculptural denudation; though all the best separate statue
s, like other moveables, had been taken away. The decadent cartouches 
and dadoes telling this story were, as I have said, the latest we coul
d find in our limited search. They left us with a picture of the Old O
nes shuttling back and forth betwixt the land city in summer and the s
ea-cavern city in winter, and sometimes trading with the sea-bottom ci
ties off the antarctic coast. By this time the ultimate doom of the la
nd city must have been recognised, for the sculptures shewed many sign
s of the cold‚Äôs malign encroachments. Vegetation was declining, and 
the terrible snows of the winter no longer melted completely even in m
idsummer. The saurian livestock were nearly all dead, and the mammals 
were standing it none too well. To keep on with the work of the upper 
world it had become necessary to adapt some of the amorphous and curio
usly cold-resistant shoggoths to land life; a thing the Old Ones had f
ormerly been reluctant to do. The great river was now lifeless, and th
e upper sea had lost most of its denizens except the seals and whales.
 All the birds had flown away, save only the great, grotesque penguins
. What had happened afterward we could only guess. How long had the ne
w sea-cavern city survived? Was it still down there, a stony corpse in
 eternal blackness? Had the subterranean waters frozen at last? To wha
t fate had the ocean-bottom cities of the outer world been delivered? 
Had any of the Old Ones shifted north ahead of the creeping ice-cap? E
xisting geology shews no trace of their presence. Had the frightful Mi
-Go been still a menace in the outer land world of the north? Could on
e be sure of what might or might not linger even to this day in the li
ghtless and unplumbed abysses of earth‚Äôs deepest waters? Those thing
s had seemingly been able to withstand any amount of pressure‚Äîand me
n of the sea have fished up curious objects at times. And has the kill
er-whale theory really explained the savage and mysterious scars on an
tarctic seals noticed a generation ago by Borchgrevingk? The specimens
 found by poor Lake did not enter into these guesses, for their geolog
ic setting proved them to have lived at what must have been a very ear
ly date in the land city‚Äôs history. They were, according to their lo
cation, certainly not less than thirty million years old; and we refle
cted that in their day the sea-cavern city, and indeed the cavern itse
lf, had no existence. They would have remembered an older scene, with 
lush Tertiary vegetation everywhere, a younger land city of flourishin
g arts around them, and a great river sweeping northward along the bas
e of the mighty mountains toward a far-away tropic ocean. And yet we c
ould not help thinking about these specimens‚Äîespecially about the ei
ght perfect ones that were missing from Lake‚Äôs hideously ravaged cam
p. There was something abnormal about that whole business‚Äîthe strang
e things we had tried so hard to lay to somebody‚Äôs madness‚Äîthose f
rightful graves‚Äîthe amount and nature of the missing material‚ÄîGedn
ey‚Äîthe unearthly toughness of those archaic monstrosities, and the q
ueer vital freaks the sculptures now shewed the race to have. . . . Da
nforth and I had seen a good deal in the last few hours, and were prep
ared to believe and keep silent about many appalling and incredible se
crets of primal Nature. IX. I have said that our study of the decadent
 sculptures brought about a change in our immediate objective. This of
 course had to do with the chiselled avenues to the black inner world,
 of whose existence we had not known before, but which we were now eag
er to find and traverse. From the evident scale of the carvings we ded
uced that a steeply descending walk of about a mile through either of 
the neighbouring tunnels would bring us to the brink of the dizzy sunl
ess cliffs above the great abyss; down whose side adequate paths, impr
oved by the Old Ones, led to the rocky shore of the hidden and nighted
 ocean. To behold this fabulous gulf in stark reality was a lure which
 seemed impossible of resistance once we knew of the thing‚Äîyet we re
alised we must begin the quest at once if we expected to include it on
 our present flight. It was now 8 P.M., and we had not enough battery 
replacements to let our torches burn on forever. We had done so much o
f our studying and copying below the glacial level that our battery su
pply had had at least five hours of nearly continuous use; and despite
 the special dry cell formula would obviously be good for only about f
our more‚Äîthough by keeping one torch unused, except for especially i
nteresting or difficult places, we might manage to eke out a safe marg
in beyond that. It would not do to be without a light in these Cyclope
an catacombs, hence in order to make the abyss trip we must give up al
l further mural deciphering. Of course we intended to revisit the plac
e for days and perhaps weeks of intensive study and photography‚Äîcuri
osity having long ago got the better of horror‚Äîbut just now we must 
hasten. Our supply of trail-blazing paper was far from unlimited, and 
we were reluctant to sacrifice spare notebooks or sketching paper to a
ugment it; but we did let one large notebook go. If worst came to wors
t, we could resort to rock-chipping‚Äîand of course it would be possib
le, even in case of really lost direction, to work up to full daylight
 by one channel or another if granted sufficient time for plentiful tr
ial and error. So at last we set off eagerly in the indicated directio
n of the nearest tunnel. According to the carvings from which we had m
ade our map, the desired tunnel-mouth could not be much more than a qu
arter-mile from where we stood; the intervening space shewing solid-lo
oking buildings quite likely to be penetrable still at a sub-glacial l
evel. The opening itself would be in the basement‚Äîon the angle neare
st the foothills‚Äîof a vast five-pointed structure of evidently publi
c and perhaps ceremonial nature, which we tried to identify from our a
√´rial survey of the ruins. No such structure came to our minds as we 
recalled our flight, hence we concluded that its upper parts had been 
greatly damaged, or that it had been totally shattered in an ice-rift 
we had noticed. In the latter case the tunnel would probably turn out 
to be choked, so that we would have to try the next nearest one‚Äîthe 
one less than a mile to the north. The intervening river-course preven
ted our trying any of the more southerly tunnels on this trip; and ind
eed, if both of the neighbouring ones were choked it was doubtful whet
her our batteries would warrant an attempt on the next northerly one‚Ä
îabout a mile beyond our second choice. As we threaded our dim way thr
ough the labyrinth with the aid of map and compass‚Äîtraversing rooms 
and corridors in every stage of ruin or preservation, clambering up ra
mps, crossing upper floors and bridges and clambering down again, enco
untering choked doorways and piles of debris, hastening now and then a
long finely preserved and uncannily immaculate stretches, taking false
 leads and retracing our way (in such cases removing the blind paper t
rail we had left), and once in a while striking the bottom of an open 
shaft through which daylight poured or trickled down‚Äîwe were repeate
dly tantalised by the sculptured walls along our route. Many must have
 told tales of immense historical importance, and only the prospect of
 later visits reconciled us to the need of passing them by. As it was,
 we slowed down once in a while and turned on our second torch. If we 
had had more films we would certainly have paused briefly to photograp
h certain bas-reliefs, but time-consuming hand copying was clearly out
 of the question. I come now once more to a place where the temptation
 to hesitate, or to hint rather than state, is very strong. It is nece
ssary, however, to reveal the rest in order to justify my course in di
scouraging further exploration. We had wormed our way very close to th
e computed site of the tunnel‚Äôs mouth‚Äîhaving crossed a second-stor
y bridge to what seemed plainly the tip of a pointed wall, and descend
ed to a ruinous corridor especially rich in decadently elaborate and a
pparently ritualistic sculptures of late workmanship‚Äîwhen, about 8:3
0 P.M., Danforth‚Äôs keen young nostrils gave us the first hint of som
ething unusual. If we had had a dog with us, I suppose we would have b
een warned before. At first we could not precisely say what was wrong 
with the formerly crystal-pure air, but after a few seconds our memori
es reacted only too definitely. Let me try to state the thing without 
flinching. There was an odour‚Äîand that odour was vaguely, subtly, an
d unmistakably akin to what had nauseated us upon opening the insane g
rave of the horror poor Lake had dissected. Of course the revelation w
as not as clearly cut at the time as it sounds now. There were several
 conceivable explanations, and we did a good deal of indecisive whispe
ring. Most important of all, we did not retreat without further invest
igation; for having come this far, we were loath to be balked by anyth
ing short of certain disaster. Anyway, what we must have suspected was
 altogether too wild to believe. Such things did not happen in any nor
mal world. It was probably sheer irrational instinct which made us dim
 our single torch‚Äîtempted no longer by the decadent and sinister scu
lptures that leered menacingly from the oppressive walls‚Äîand which s
oftened our progress to a cautious tiptoeing and crawling over the inc
reasingly littered floor and heaps of debris. Danforth‚Äôs eyes as wel
l as nose proved better than mine, for it was likewise he who first no
ticed the queer aspect of the debris after we had passed many half-cho
ked arches leading to chambers and corridors on the ground level. It d
id not look quite as it ought after countless thousands of years of de
sertion, and when we cautiously turned on more light we saw that a kin
d of swath seemed to have been lately tracked through it. The irregula
r nature of the litter precluded any definite marks, but in the smooth
er places there were suggestions of the dragging of heavy objects. Onc
e we thought there was a hint of parallel tracks, as if of runners. Th
is was what made us pause again. It was during that pause that we caug
ht‚Äîsimultaneously this time‚Äîthe other odour ahead. Paradoxically, 
it was both a less frightful and a more frightful odour‚Äîless frightf
ul intrinsically, but infinitely appalling in this place under the kno
wn circumstances . . . unless, of course, Gedney. . . . For the odour 
was the plain and familiar one of common petrol‚Äîevery-day gasoline. 
Our motivation after that is something I will leave to psychologists. 
We knew now that some terrible extension of the camp horrors must have
 crawled into this nighted burial-place of the aeons, hence could not 
doubt any longer the existence of nameless conditions‚Äîpresent or at 
least recent‚Äîjust ahead. Yet in the end we did let sheer burning cur
iosity‚Äîor anxiety‚Äîor auto-hypnotism‚Äîor vague thoughts of respons
ibility toward Gedney‚Äîor what not‚Äîdrive us on. Danforth whispered 
again of the print he thought he had seen at the alley-turning in the 
ruins above; and of the faint musical piping‚Äîpotentially of tremendo
us significance in the light of Lake‚Äôs dissection report despite its
 close resemblance to the cave-mouth echoes of the windy peaks‚Äîwhich
 he thought he had shortly afterward half heard from unknown depths be
low. I, in my turn, whispered of how the camp was left‚Äîof what had d
isappeared, and of how the madness of a lone survivor might have conce
ived the inconceivable‚Äîa wild trip across the monstrous mountains an
d a descent into the unknown primal masonry‚Äî But we could not convin
ce each other, or even ourselves, of anything definite. We had turned 
off all light as we stood still, and vaguely noticed that a trace of d
eeply filtered upper day kept the blackness from being absolute. Havin
g automatically begun to move ahead, we guided ourselves by occasional
 flashes from our torch. The disturbed debris formed an impression we 
could not shake off, and the smell of gasoline grew stronger. More and
 more ruin met our eyes and hampered our feet, until very soon we saw 
that the forward way was about to cease. We had been all too correct i
n our pessimistic guess about that rift glimpsed from the air. Our tun
nel quest was a blind one, and we were not even going to be able to re
ach the basement out of which the abyssward aperture opened. The torch
, flashing over the grotesquely carven walls of the blocked corridor i
n which we stood, shewed several doorways in various states of obstruc
tion; and from one of them the gasoline odour‚Äîquite submerging that 
other hint of odour‚Äîcame with especial distinctness. As we looked mo
re steadily, we saw that beyond a doubt there had been a slight and re
cent clearing away of debris from that particular opening. Whatever th
e lurking horror might be, we believed the direct avenue toward it was
 now plainly manifest. I do not think anyone will wonder that we waite
d an appreciable time before making any further motion. And yet, when 
we did venture inside that black arch, our first impression was one of
 anticlimax. For amidst the littered expanse of that sculptured crypt‚
Äîa perfect cube with sides of about twenty feet‚Äîthere remained no r
ecent object of instantly discernible size; so that we looked instinct
ively, though in vain, for a farther doorway. In another moment, howev
er, Danforth‚Äôs sharp vision had descried a place where the floor deb
ris had been disturbed; and we turned on both torches full strength. T
hough what we saw in that light was actually simple and trifling, I am
 none the less reluctant to tell of it because of what it implied. It 
was a rough levelling of the debris, upon which several small objects 
lay carelessly scattered, and at one corner of which a considerable am
ount of gasoline must have been spilled lately enough to leave a stron
g odour even at this extreme super-plateau altitude. In other words, i
t could not be other than a sort of camp‚Äîa camp made by questing bei
ngs who like us had been turned back by the unexpectedly choked way to
 the abyss. Let me be plain. The scattered objects were, so far as sub
stance was concerned, all from Lake‚Äôs camp; and consisted of tin can
s as queerly opened as those we had seen at that ravaged place, many s
pent matches, three illustrated books more or less curiously smudged, 
an empty ink bottle with its pictorial and instructional carton, a bro
ken fountain pen, some oddly snipped fragments of fur and tent-cloth, 
a used electric battery with circular of directions, a folder that cam
e with our type of tent heater, and a sprinkling of crumpled papers. I
t was all bad enough, but when we smoothed out the papers and looked a
t what was on them we felt we had come to the worst. We had found cert
ain inexplicably blotted papers at the camp which might have prepared 
us, yet the effect of the sight down there in the pre-human vaults of 
a nightmare city was almost too much to bear. A mad Gedney might have 
made the groups of dots in imitation of those found on the greenish so
apstones, just as the dots on those insane five-pointed grave-mounds m
ight have been made; and he might conceivably have prepared rough, has
ty sketches‚Äîvarying in their accuracy or lack of it‚Äîwhich outlined
 the neighbouring parts of the city and traced the way from a circular
ly represented place outside our previous route‚Äîa place we identifie
d as a great cylindrical tower in the carvings and as a vast circular 
gulf glimpsed in our a√´rial survey‚Äîto the present five-pointed stru
cture and the tunnel-mouth therein. He might, I repeat, have prepared 
such sketches; for those before us were quite obviously compiled as ou
r own had been from late sculptures somewhere in the glacial labyrinth
, though not from the ones which we had seen and used. But what this a
rt-blind bungler could never have done was to execute those sketches i
n a strange and assured technique perhaps superior, despite haste and 
carelessness, to any of the decadent carvings from which they were tak
en‚Äîthe characteristic and unmistakable technique of the Old Ones the
mselves in the dead city‚Äôs heyday. There are those who will say Danf
orth and I were utterly mad not to flee for our lives after that; sinc
e our conclusions were now‚Äînotwithstanding their wildness‚Äîcomplete
ly fixed, and of a nature I need not even mention to those who have re
ad my account as far as this. Perhaps we were mad‚Äîfor have I not sai
d those horrible peaks were mountains of madness? But I think I can de
tect something of the same spirit‚Äîalbeit in a less extreme form‚Äîin
 the men who stalk deadly beasts through African jungles to photograph
 them or study their habits. Half-paralysed with terror though we were
, there was nevertheless fanned within us a blazing flame of awe and c
uriosity which triumphed in the end. Of course we did not mean to face
 that‚Äîor those‚Äîwhich we knew had been there, but we felt that they
 must be gone by now. They would by this time have found the other nei
ghbouring entrance to the abyss, and have passed within to whatever ni
ght-black fragments of the past might await them in the ultimate gulf‚
Äîthe ultimate gulf they had never seen. Or if that entrance, too, was
 blocked, they would have gone on to the north seeking another. They w
ere, we remembered, partly independent of light. Looking back to that 
moment, I can scarcely recall just what precise form our new emotions 
took‚Äîjust what change of immediate objective it was that so sharpene
d our sense of expectancy. We certainly did not mean to face what we f
eared‚Äîyet I will not deny that we may have had a lurking, unconsciou
s wish to spy certain things from some hidden vantage-point. Probably 
we had not given up our zeal to glimpse the abyss itself, though there
 was interposed a new goal in the form of that great circular place sh
ewn on the crumpled sketches we had found. We had at once recognised i
t as a monstrous cylindrical tower figuring in the very earliest carvi
ngs, but appearing only as a prodigious round aperture from above. Som
ething about the impressiveness of its rendering, even in these hasty 
diagrams, made us think that its sub-glacial levels must still form a 
feature of peculiar importance. Perhaps it embodied architectural marv
els as yet unencountered by us. It was certainly of incredible age acc
ording to the sculptures in which it figured‚Äîbeing indeed among the 
first things built in the city. Its carvings, if preserved, could not 
but be highly significant. Moreover, it might form a good present link
 with the upper world‚Äîa shorter route than the one we were so carefu
lly blazing, and probably that by which those others had descended. At
 any rate, the thing we did was to study the terrible sketches‚Äîwhich
 quite perfectly confirmed our own‚Äîand start back over the indicated
 course to the circular place; the course which our nameless predecess
ors must have traversed twice before us. The other neighbouring gate t
o the abyss would lie beyond that. I need not speak of our journey‚Äîd
uring which we continued to leave an economical trail of paper‚Äîfor i
t was precisely the same in kind as that by which we had reached the c
ul de sac; except that it tended to adhere more closely to the ground 
level and even descend to basement corridors. Every now and then we co
uld trace certain disturbing marks in the debris or litter under foot;
 and after we had passed outside the radius of the gasoline scent we w
ere again faintly conscious‚Äîspasmodically‚Äîof that more hideous and
 more persistent scent. After the way had branched from our former cou
rse we sometimes gave the rays of our single torch a furtive sweep alo
ng the walls; noting in almost every case the well-nigh omnipresent sc
ulptures, which indeed seem to have formed a main aesthetic outlet for
 the Old Ones. About 9:30 P.M., while traversing a vaulted corridor wh
ose increasingly glaciated floor seemed somewhat below the ground leve
l and whose roof grew lower as we advanced, we began to see strong day
light ahead and were able to turn off our torch. It appeared that we w
ere coming to the vast circular place, and that our distance from the 
upper air could not be very great. The corridor ended in an arch surpr
isingly low for these megalithic ruins, but we could see much through 
it even before we emerged. Beyond there stretched a prodigious round s
pace‚Äîfully 200 feet in diameter‚Äîstrown with debris and containing 
many choked archways corresponding to the one we were about to cross. 
The walls were‚Äîin available spaces‚Äîboldly sculptured into a spiral
 band of heroic proportions; and displayed, despite the destructive we
athering caused by the openness of the spot, an artistic splendour far
 beyond anything we had encountered before. The littered floor was qui
te heavily glaciated, and we fancied that the true bottom lay at a con
siderably lower depth. But the salient object of the place was the tit
anic stone ramp which, eluding the archways by a sharp turn outward in
to the open floor, wound spirally up the stupendous cylindrical wall l
ike an inside counterpart of those once climbing outside the monstrous
 towers or ziggurats of antique Babylon. Only the rapidity of our flig
ht, and the perspective which confounded the descent with the tower‚Äô
s inner wall, had prevented our noticing this feature from the air, an
d thus caused us to seek another avenue to the sub-glacial level. Pabo
die might have been able to tell what sort of engineering held it in p
lace, but Danforth and I could merely admire and marvel. We could see 
mighty stone corbels and pillars here and there, but what we saw seeme
d inadequate to the function performed. The thing was excellently pres
erved up to the present top of the tower‚Äîa highly remarkable circums
tance in view of its exposure‚Äîand its shelter had done much to prote
ct the bizarre and disturbing cosmic sculptures on the walls. As we st
epped out into the awesome half-daylight of this monstrous cylinder-bo
ttom‚Äîfifty million years old, and without doubt the most primally an
cient structure ever to meet our eyes‚Äîwe saw that the ramp-traversed
 sides stretched dizzily up to a height of fully sixty feet. This, we 
recalled from our a√´rial survey, meant an outside glaciation of some 
forty feet; since the yawning gulf we had seen from the plane had been
 at the top of an approximately twenty-foot mound of crumbled masonry,
 somewhat sheltered for three-fourths of its circumference by the mass
ive curving walls of a line of higher ruins. According to the sculptur
es the original tower had stood in the centre of an immense circular p
laza; and had been perhaps 500 or 600 feet high, with tiers of horizon
tal discs near the top, and a row of needle-like spires along the uppe
r rim. Most of the masonry had obviously toppled outward rather than i
nward‚Äîa fortunate happening, since otherwise the ramp might have bee
n shattered and the whole interior choked. As it was, the ramp shewed 
sad battering; whilst the choking was such that all the archways at th
e bottom seemed to have been recently half-cleared. It took us only a 
moment to conclude that this was indeed the route by which those other
s had descended, and that this would be the logical route for our own 
ascent despite the long trail of paper we had left elsewhere. The towe
r‚Äôs mouth was no farther from the foothills and our waiting plane th
an was the great terraced building we had entered, and any further sub
-glacial exploration we might make on this trip would lie in this gene
ral region. Oddly, we were still thinking about possible later trips‚Ä
îeven after all we had seen and guessed. Then as we picked our way cau
tiously over the debris of the great floor, there came a sight which f
or the time excluded all other matters. It was the neatly huddled arra
y of three sledges in that farther angle of the ramp‚Äôs lower and out
ward-projecting course which had hitherto been screened from our view.
 There they were‚Äîthe three sledges missing from Lake‚Äôs camp‚Äîshak
en by a hard usage which must have included forcible dragging along gr
eat reaches of snowless masonry and debris, as well as much hand porta
ge over utterly unnavigable places. They were carefully and intelligen
tly packed and strapped, and contained things memorably familiar enoug
h‚Äîthe gasoline stove, fuel cans, instrument cases, provision tins, t
arpaulins obviously bulging with books, and some bulging with less obv
ious contents‚Äîeverything derived from Lake‚Äôs equipment. After what
 we had found in that other room, we were in a measure prepared for th
is encounter. The really great shock came when we stepped over and und
id one tarpaulin whose outlines had peculiarly disquieted us. It seems
 that others as well as Lake had been interested in collecting typical
 specimens; for there were two here, both stiffly frozen, perfectly pr
eserved, patched with adhesive plaster where some wounds around the ne
ck had occurred, and wrapped with patent care to prevent further damag
e. They were the bodies of young Gedney and the missing dog. X. Many p
eople will probably judge us callous as well as mad for thinking about
 the northward tunnel and the abyss so soon after our sombre discovery
, and I am not prepared to say that we would have immediately revived 
such thoughts but for a specific circumstance which broke in upon us a
nd set up a whole new train of speculations. We had replaced the tarpa
ulin over poor Gedney and were standing in a kind of mute bewilderment
 when the sounds finally reached our consciousness‚Äîthe first sounds 
we had heard since descending out of the open where the mountain wind 
whined faintly from its unearthly heights. Well known and mundane thou
gh they were, their presence in this remote world of death was more un
expected and unnerving than any grotesque or fabulous tones could poss
ibly have been‚Äîsince they gave a fresh upsetting to all our notions 
of cosmic harmony. Had it been some trace of that bizarre musical pipi
ng over a wide range which Lake‚Äôs dissection report had led us to ex
pect in those others‚Äîand which, indeed, our overwrought fancies had 
been reading into every wind-howl we had heard since coming on the cam
p horror‚Äîit would have had a kind of hellish congruity with the aeon
-dead region around us. A voice from other epochs belongs in a graveya
rd of other epochs. As it was, however, the noise shattered all our pr
ofoundly seated adjustments‚Äîall our tacit acceptance of the inner an
tarctic as a waste as utterly and irrevocably void of every vestige of
 normal life as the sterile disc of the moon. What we heard was not th
e fabulous note of any buried blasphemy of elder earth from whose supe
rnal toughness an age-denied polar sun had evoked a monstrous response
. Instead, it was a thing so mockingly normal and so unerringly famili
arised by our sea days off Victoria Land and our camp days at McMurdo 
Sound that we shuddered to think of it here, where such things ought n
ot to be. To be brief‚Äîit was simply the raucous squawking of a pengu
in. The muffled sound floated from sub-glacial recesses nearly opposit
e to the corridor whence we had come‚Äîregions manifestly in the direc
tion of that other tunnel to the vast abyss. The presence of a living 
water-bird in such a direction‚Äîin a world whose surface was one of a
ge-long and uniform lifelessness‚Äîcould lead to only one conclusion; 
hence our first thought was to verify the objective reality of the sou
nd. It was, indeed, repeated; and seemed at times to come from more th
an one throat. Seeking its source, we entered an archway from which mu
ch debris had been cleared; resuming our trail-blazing‚Äîwith an added
 paper-supply taken with curious repugnance from one of the tarpaulin 
bundles on the sledges‚Äîwhen we left daylight behind. As the glaciate
d floor gave place to a litter of detritus, we plainly discerned some 
curious dragging tracks; and once Danforth found a distinct print of a
 sort whose description would be only too superfluous. The course indi
cated by the penguin cries was precisely what our map and compass pres
cribed as an approach to the more northerly tunnel-mouth, and we were 
glad to find that a bridgeless thoroughfare on the ground and basement
 levels seemed open. The tunnel, according to the chart, ought to star
t from the basement of a large pyramidal structure which we seemed vag
uely to recall from our a√´rial survey as remarkably well preserved. A
long our path the single torch shewed a customary profusion of carving
s, but we did not pause to examine any of these. Suddenly a bulky whit
e shape loomed up ahead of us, and we flashed on the second torch. It 
is odd how wholly this new quest had turned our minds from earlier fea
rs of what might lurk near. Those other ones, having left their suppli
es in the great circular place, must have planned to return after thei
r scouting trip toward or into the abyss; yet we had now discarded all
 caution concerning them as completely as if they had never existed. T
his white, waddling thing was fully six feet high, yet we seemed to re
alise at once that it was not one of those others. They were larger an
d dark, and according to the sculptures their motion over land surface
s was a swift, assured matter despite the queerness of their sea-born 
tentacle equipment. But to say that the white thing did not profoundly
 frighten us would be vain. We were indeed clutched for an instant by 
a primitive dread almost sharper than the worst of our reasoned fears 
regarding those others. Then came a flash of anticlimax as the white s
hape sidled into a lateral archway to our left to join two others of i
ts kind which had summoned it in raucous tones. For it was only a peng
uin‚Äîalbeit of a huge, unknown species larger than the greatest of th
e known king penguins, and monstrous in its combined albinism and virt
ual eyelessness. When we had followed the thing into the archway and t
urned both our torches on the indifferent and unheeding group of three
 we saw that they were all eyeless albinos of the same unknown and gig
antic species. Their size reminded us of some of the archaic penguins 
depicted in the Old Ones‚Äô sculptures, and it did not take us long to
 conclude that they were descended from the same stock‚Äîundoubtedly s
urviving through a retreat to some warmer inner region whose perpetual
 blackness had destroyed their pigmentation and atrophied their eyes t
o mere useless slits. That their present habitat was the vast abyss we
 sought, was not for a moment to be doubted; and this evidence of the 
gulf‚Äôs continued warmth and habitability filled us with the most cur
ious and subtly perturbing fancies. We wondered, too, what had caused 
these three birds to venture out of their usual domain. The state and 
silence of the great dead city made it clear that it had at no time be
en an habitual seasonal rookery, whilst the manifest indifference of t
he trio to our presence made it seem odd that any passing party of tho
se others should have startled them. Was it possible that those others
 had taken some aggressive action or tried to increase their meat supp
ly? We doubted whether that pungent odour which the dogs had hated cou
ld cause an equal antipathy in these penguins; since their ancestors h
ad obviously lived on excellent terms with the Old Ones‚Äîan amicable 
relationship which must have survived in the abyss below as long as an
y of the Old Ones remained. Regretting‚Äîin a flareup of the old spiri
t of pure science‚Äîthat we could not photograph these anomalous creat
ures, we shortly left them to their squawking and pushed on toward the
 abyss whose openness was now so positively proved to us, and whose ex
act direction occasional penguin tracks made clear. Not long afterward
 a steep descent in a long, low, doorless, and peculiarly sculptureles
s corridor led us to believe that we were approaching the tunnel-mouth
 at last. We had passed two more penguins, and heard others immediatel
y ahead. Then the corridor ended in a prodigious open space which made
 us gasp involuntarily‚Äîa perfect inverted hemisphere, obviously deep
 underground; fully an hundred feet in diameter and fifty feet high, w
ith low archways opening around all parts of the circumference but one
, and that one yawning cavernously with a black arched aperture which 
broke the symmetry of the vault to a height of nearly fifteen feet. It
 was the entrance to the great abyss. In this vast hemisphere, whose c
oncave roof was impressively though decadently carved to a likeness of
 the primordial celestial dome, a few albino penguins waddled‚Äîaliens
 there, but indifferent and unseeing. The black tunnel yawned indefini
tely off at a steep descending grade, its aperture adorned with grotes
quely chiselled jambs and lintel. From that cryptical mouth we fancied
 a current of slightly warmer air and perhaps even a suspicion of vapo
ur proceeded; and we wondered what living entities other than penguins
 the limitless void below, and the contiguous honeycombings of the lan
d and the titan mountains, might conceal. We wondered, too, whether th
e trace of mountain-top smoke at first suspected by poor Lake, as well
 as the odd haze we had ourselves perceived around the rampart-crowned
 peak, might not be caused by the tortuous-channelled rising of some s
uch vapour from the unfathomed regions of earth‚Äôs core. Entering the
 tunnel, we saw that its outline was‚Äîat least at the start‚Äîabout f
ifteen feet each way; sides, floor, and arched roof composed of the us
ual megalithic masonry. The sides were sparsely decorated with cartouc
hes of conventional designs in a late, decadent style; and all the con
struction and carving were marvellously well preserved. The floor was 
quite clear, except for a slight detritus bearing outgoing penguin tra
cks and the inward tracks of those others. The farther one advanced, t
he warmer it became; so that we were soon unbuttoning our heavy garmen
ts. We wondered whether there were any actually igneous manifestations
 below, and whether the waters of that sunless sea were hot. After a s
hort distance the masonry gave place to solid rock, though the tunnel 
kept the same proportions and presented the same aspect of carved regu
larity. Occasionally its varying grade became so steep that grooves we
re cut in the floor. Several times we noted the mouths of small latera
l galleries not recorded in our diagrams; none of them such as to comp
licate the problem of our return, and all of them welcome as possible 
refuges in case we met unwelcome entities on their way back from the a
byss. The nameless scent of such things was very distinct. Doubtless i
t was suicidally foolish to venture into that tunnel under the known c
onditions, but the lure of the unplumbed is stronger in certain person
s than most suspect‚Äîindeed, it was just such a lure which had brough
t us to this unearthly polar waste in the first place. We saw several 
penguins as we passed along, and speculated on the distance we would h
ave to traverse. The carvings had led us to expect a steep downhill wa
lk of about a mile to the abyss, but our previous wanderings had shewn
 us that matters of scale were not wholly to be depended on. After abo
ut a quarter of a mile that nameless scent became greatly accentuated,
 and we kept very careful track of the various lateral openings we pas
sed. There was no visible vapour as at the mouth, but this was doubtle
ss due to the lack of contrasting cooler air. The temperature was rapi
dly ascending, and we were not surprised to come upon a careless heap 
of material shudderingly familiar to us. It was composed of furs and t
ent-cloth taken from Lake‚Äôs camp, and we did not pause to study the 
bizarre forms into which the fabrics had been slashed. Slightly beyond
 this point we noticed a decided increase in the size and number of th
e side-galleries, and concluded that the densely honeycombed region be
neath the higher foothills must now have been reached. The nameless sc
ent was now curiously mixed with another and scarcely less offensive o
dour‚Äîof what nature we could not guess, though we thought of decayin
g organisms and perhaps unknown subterrene fungi. Then came a startlin
g expansion of the tunnel for which the carvings had not prepared us‚Ä
îa broadening and rising into a lofty, natural-looking elliptical cave
rn with a level floor; some 75 feet long and 50 broad, and with many i
mmense side-passages leading away into cryptical darkness. Though this
 cavern was natural in appearance, an inspection with both torches sug
gested that it had been formed by the artificial destruction of severa
l walls between adjacent honeycombings. The walls were rough, and the 
high vaulted roof was thick with stalactites; but the solid rock floor
 had been smoothed off, and was free from all debris, detritus, or eve
n dust to a positively abnormal extent. Except for the avenue through 
which we had come, this was true of the floors of all the great galler
ies opening off from it; and the singularity of the condition was such
 as to set us vainly puzzling. The curious new foetor which had supple
mented the nameless scent was excessively pungent here; so much so tha
t it destroyed all trace of the other. Something about this whole plac
e, with its polished and almost glistening floor, struck us as more va
guely baffling and horrible than any of the monstrous things we had pr
eviously encountered. The regularity of the passage immediately ahead,
 as well as the larger proportion of penguin-droppings there, prevente
d all confusion as to the right course amidst this plethora of equally
 great cave-mouths. Nevertheless we resolved to resume our paper trail
-blazing if any further complexity should develop; for dust tracks, of
 course, could no longer be expected. Upon resuming our direct progres
s we cast a beam of torchlight over the tunnel walls‚Äîand stopped sho
rt in amazement at the supremely radical change which had come over th
e carvings in this part of the passage. We realised, of course, the gr
eat decadence of the Old Ones‚Äô sculpture at the time of the tunnelli
ng; and had indeed noticed the inferior workmanship of the arabesques 
in the stretches behind us. But now, in this deeper section beyond the
 cavern, there was a sudden difference wholly transcending explanation
‚Äîa difference in basic nature as well as in mere quality, and involv
ing so profound and calamitous a degradation of skill that nothing in 
the hitherto observed rate of decline could have led one to expect it.
 This new and degenerate work was coarse, bold, and wholly lacking in 
delicacy of detail. It was counter-sunk with exaggerated depth in band
s following the same general line as the sparse cartouches of the earl
ier sections, but the height of the reliefs did not reach the level of
 the general surface. Danforth had the idea that it was a second carvi
ng‚Äîa sort of palimpsest formed after the obliteration of a previous 
design. In nature it was wholly decorative and conventional; and consi
sted of crude spirals and angles roughly following the quintile mathem
atical tradition of the Old Ones, yet seeming more like a parody than 
a perpetuation of that tradition. We could not get it out of our minds
 that some subtly but profoundly alien element had been added to the a
esthetic feeling behind the technique‚Äîan alien element, Danforth gue
ssed, that was responsible for the manifestly laborious substitution. 
It was like, yet disturbingly unlike, what we had come to recognise as
 the Old Ones‚Äô art; and I was persistently reminded of such hybrid t
hings as the ungainly Palmyrene sculptures fashioned in the Roman mann
er. That others had recently noticed this belt of carving was hinted b
y the presence of a used torch battery on the floor in front of one of
 the most characteristic designs. Since we could not afford to spend a
ny considerable time in study, we resumed our advance after a cursory 
look; though frequently casting beams over the walls to see if any fur
ther decorative changes developed. Nothing of the sort was perceived, 
though the carvings were in places rather sparse because of the numero
us mouths of smooth-floored lateral tunnels. We saw and heard fewer pe
nguins, but thought we caught a vague suspicion of an infinitely dista
nt chorus of them somewhere deep within the earth. The new and inexpli
cable odour was abominably strong, and we could detect scarcely a sign
 of that other nameless scent. Puffs of visible vapour ahead bespoke i
ncreasing contrasts in temperature, and the relative nearness of the s
unless sea-cliffs of the great abyss. Then, quite unexpectedly, we saw
 certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead‚Äîobstructions which
 were quite definitely not penguins‚Äîand turned on our second torch a
fter making sure that the objects were quite stationary. XI. Still ano
ther time have I come to a place where it is very difficult to proceed
. I ought to be hardened by this stage; but there are some experiences
 and intimations which scar too deeply to permit of healing, and leave
 only such an added sensitiveness that memory reinspires all the origi
nal horror. We saw, as I have said, certain obstructions on the polish
ed floor ahead; and I may add that our nostrils were assailed almost s
imultaneously by a very curious intensification of the strange prevail
ing foetor, now quite plainly mixed with the nameless stench of those 
others which had gone before us. The light of the second torch left no
 doubt of what the obstructions were, and we dared approach them only 
because we could see, even from a distance, that they were quite as pa
st all harming power as had been the six similar specimens unearthed f
rom the monstrous star-mounded graves at poor Lake‚Äôs camp. They were
, indeed, as lacking in completeness as most of those we had unearthed
‚Äîthough it grew plain from the thick, dark-green pool gathering arou
nd them that their incompleteness was of infinitely greater recency. T
here seemed to be only four of them, whereas Lake‚Äôs bulletins would 
have suggested no less than eight as forming the group which had prece
ded us. To find them in this state was wholly unexpected, and we wonde
red what sort of monstrous struggle had occurred down here in the dark
. Penguins, attacked in a body, retaliate savagely with their beaks; a
nd our ears now made certain the existence of a rookery far beyond. Ha
d those others disturbed such a place and aroused murderous pursuit? T
he obstructions did not suggest it, for penguin beaks against the toug
h tissues Lake had dissected could hardly account for the terrible dam
age our approaching glance was beginning to make out. Besides, the hug
e blind birds we had seen appeared to be singularly peaceful. Had ther
e, then, been a struggle among those others, and were the absent four 
responsible? If so, where were they? Were they close at hand and likel
y to form an immediate menace to us? We glanced anxiously at some of t
he smooth-floored lateral passages as we continued our slow and frankl
y reluctant approach. Whatever the conflict was, it had clearly been t
hat which had frightened the penguins into their unaccustomed wanderin
g. It must, then, have arisen near that faintly heard rookery in the i
ncalculable gulf beyond, since there were no signs that any birds had 
normally dwelt here. Perhaps, we reflected, there had been a hideous r
unning fight, with the weaker party seeking to get back to the cached 
sledges when their pursuers finished them. One could picture the daemo
niac fray between namelessly monstrous entities as it surged out of th
e black abyss with great clouds of frantic penguins squawking and scur
rying ahead. I say that we approached those sprawling and incomplete o
bstructions slowly and reluctantly. Would to heaven we had never appro
ached them at all, but had run back at top speed out of that blasphemo
us tunnel with the greasily smooth floors and the degenerate murals ap
ing and mocking the things they had superseded‚Äîrun back, before we h
ad seen what we did see, and before our minds were burned with somethi
ng which will never let us breathe easily again! Both of our torches w
ere turned on the prostrate objects, so that we soon realised the domi
nant factor in their incompleteness. Mauled, compressed, twisted, and 
ruptured as they were, their chief common injury was total decapitatio
n. From each one the tentacled starfish-head had been removed; and as 
we drew near we saw that the manner of removal looked more like some h
ellish tearing or suction than like any ordinary form of cleavage. The
ir noisome dark-green ichor formed a large, spreading pool; but its st
ench was half overshadowed by that newer and stranger stench, here mor
e pungent than at any other point along our route. Only when we had co
me very close to the sprawling obstructions could we trace that second
, unexplainable foetor to any immediate source‚Äîand the instant we di
d so Danforth, remembering certain very vivid sculptures of the Old On
es‚Äô history in the Permian age 150 million years ago, gave vent to a
 nerve-tortured cry which echoed hysterically through that vaulted and
 archaic passage with the evil palimpsest carvings. I came only just s
hort of echoing his cry myself; for I had seen those primal sculptures
, too, and had shudderingly admired the way the nameless artist had su
ggested that hideous slime-coating found on certain incomplete and pro
strate Old Ones‚Äîthose whom the frightful shoggoths had characteristi
cally slain and sucked to a ghastly headlessness in the great war of r
e-subjugation. They were infamous, nightmare sculptures even when tell
ing of age-old, bygone things; for shoggoths and their work ought not 
to be seen by human beings or portrayed by any beings. The mad author 
of the Necronomicon had nervously tried to swear that none had been br
ed on this planet, and that only drugged dreamers had ever conceived t
hem. Formless protoplasm able to mock and reflect all forms and organs
 and processes‚Äîviscous agglutinations of bubbling cells‚Äîrubbery fi
fteen-foot spheroids infinitely plastic and ductile‚Äîslaves of sugges
tion, builders of cities‚Äîmore and more sullen, more and more intelli
gent, more and more amphibious, more and more imitative‚ÄîGreat God! W
hat madness made even those blasphemous Old Ones willing to use and to
 carve such things? And now, when Danforth and I saw the freshly glist
ening and reflectively iridescent black slime which clung thickly to t
hose headless bodies and stank obscenely with that new unknown odour w
hose cause only a diseased fancy could envisage‚Äîclung to those bodie
s and sparkled less voluminously on a smooth part of the accursedly re
-sculptured wall in a series of grouped dots‚Äîwe understood the quali
ty of cosmic fear to its uttermost depths. It was not fear of those fo
ur missing others‚Äîfor all too well did we suspect they would do no h
arm again. Poor devils! After all, they were not evil things of their 
kind. They were the men of another age and another order of being. Nat
ure had played a hellish jest on them‚Äîas it will on any others that 
human madness, callousness, or cruelty may hereafter drag up in that h
ideously dead or sleeping polar waste‚Äîand this was their tragic home
coming. They had not been even savages‚Äîfor what indeed had they done
? That awful awakening in the cold of an unknown epoch‚Äîperhaps an at
tack by the furry, frantically barking quadrupeds, and a dazed defence
 against them and the equally frantic white simians with the queer wra
ppings and paraphernalia . . . poor Lake, poor Gedney . . . and poor O
ld Ones! Scientists to the last‚Äîwhat had they done that we would not
 have done in their place? God, what intelligence and persistence! Wha
t a facing of the incredible, just as those carven kinsmen and forbear
s had faced things only a little less incredible! Radiates, vegetables
, monstrosities, star-spawn‚Äîwhatever they had been, they were men! T
hey had crossed the icy peaks on whose templed slopes they had once wo
rshipped and roamed among the tree-ferns. They had found their dead ci
ty brooding under its curse, and had read its carven latter days as we
 had done. They had tried to reach their living fellows in fabled dept
hs of blackness they had never seen‚Äîand what had they found? All thi
s flashed in unison through the thoughts of Danforth and me as we look
ed from those headless, slime-coated shapes to the loathsome palimpses
t sculptures and the diabolical dot-groups of fresh slime on the wall 
beside them‚Äîlooked and understood what must have triumphed and survi
ved down there in the Cyclopean water-city of that nighted, penguin-fr
inged abyss, whence even now a sinister curling mist had begun to belc
h pallidly as if in answer to Danforth‚Äôs hysterical scream. The shoc
k of recognising that monstrous slime and headlessness had frozen us i
nto mute, motionless statues, and it is only through later conversatio
ns that we have learned of the complete identity of our thoughts at th
at moment. It seemed aeons that we stood there, but actually it could 
not have been more than ten or fifteen seconds. That hateful, pallid m
ist curled forward as if veritably driven by some remoter advancing bu
lk‚Äîand then came a sound which upset much of what we had just decide
d, and in so doing broke the spell and enabled us to run like mad past
 squawking, confused penguins over our former trail back to the city, 
along ice-sunken megalithic corridors to the great open circle, and up
 that archaic spiral ramp in a frenzied automatic plunge for the sane 
outer air and light of day. The new sound, as I have intimated, upset 
much that we had decided; because it was what poor Lake‚Äôs dissection
 had led us to attribute to those we had just judged dead. It was, Dan
forth later told me, precisely what he had caught in infinitely muffle
d form when at that spot beyond the alley-corner above the glacial lev
el; and it certainly had a shocking resemblance to the wind-pipings we
 had both heard around the lofty mountain caves. At the risk of seemin
g puerile I will add another thing, too; if only because of the surpri
sing way Danforth‚Äôs impression chimed with mine. Of course common re
ading is what prepared us both to make the interpretation, though Danf
orth has hinted at queer notions about unsuspected and forbidden sourc
es to which Poe may have had access when writing his Arthur Gordon Pym
 a century ago. It will be remembered that in that fantastic tale ther
e is a word of unknown but terrible and prodigious significance connec
ted with the antarctic and screamed eternally by the gigantic, spectra
lly snowy birds of that malign region‚Äôs core. ‚ÄúTekeli-li! Tekeli-l
i!‚Äù That, I may admit, is exactly what we thought we heard conveyed 
by that sudden sound behind the advancing white mist‚Äîthat insidious 
musical piping over a singularly wide range. We were in full flight be
fore three notes or syllables had been uttered, though we knew that th
e swiftness of the Old Ones would enable any scream-roused and pursuin
g survivor of the slaughter to overtake us in a moment if it really wi
shed to do so. We had a vague hope, however, that non-aggressive condu
ct and a display of kindred reason might cause such a being to spare u
s in case of capture; if only from scientific curiosity. After all, if
 such an one had nothing to fear for itself it would have no motive in
 harming us. Concealment being futile at this juncture, we used our to
rch for a running glance behind, and perceived that the mist was thinn
ing. Would we see, at last, a complete and living specimen of those ot
hers? Again came that insidious musical piping‚Äî‚ÄúTekeli-li! Tekeli-
li!‚Äù Then, noting that we were actually gaining on our pursuer, it o
ccurred to us that the entity might be wounded. We could take no chanc
es, however, since it was very obviously approaching in answer to Danf
orth‚Äôs scream rather than in flight from any other entity. The timin
g was too close to admit of doubt. Of the whereabouts of that less con
ceivable and less mentionable nightmare‚Äîthat foetid, unglimpsed moun
tain of slime-spewing protoplasm whose race had conquered the abyss an
d sent land pioneers to re-carve and squirm through the burrows of the
 hills‚Äîwe could form no guess; and it cost us a genuine pang to leav
e this probably crippled Old One‚Äîperhaps a lone survivor‚Äîto the pe
ril of recapture and a nameless fate. Thank heaven we did not slacken 
our run. The curling mist had thickened again, and was driving ahead w
ith increased speed; whilst the straying penguins in our rear were squ
awking and screaming and displaying signs of a panic really surprising
 in view of their relatively minor confusion when we had passed them. 
Once more came that sinister, wide-ranged piping‚Äî‚ÄúTekeli-li! Tekel
i-li!‚Äù We had been wrong. The thing was not wounded, but had merely 
paused on encountering the bodies of its fallen kindred and the hellis
h slime inscription above them. We could never know what that daemon m
essage was‚Äîbut those burials at Lake‚Äôs camp had shewn how much imp
ortance the beings attached to their dead. Our recklessly used torch n
ow revealed ahead of us the large open cavern where various ways conve
rged, and we were glad to be leaving those morbid palimpsest sculpture
s‚Äîalmost felt even when scarcely seen‚Äîbehind. Another thought whic
h the advent of the cave inspired was the possibility of losing our pu
rsuer at this bewildering focus of large galleries. There were several
 of the blind albino penguins in the open space, and it seemed clear t
hat their fear of the oncoming entity was extreme to the point of unac
countability. If at that point we dimmed our torch to the very lowest 
limit of travelling need, keeping it strictly in front of us, the frig
htened squawking motions of the huge birds in the mist might muffle ou
r footfalls, screen our true course, and somehow set up a false lead. 
Amidst the churning, spiralling fog the littered and unglistening floo
r of the main tunnel beyond this point, as differing from the other mo
rbidly polished burrows, could hardly form a highly distinguishing fea
ture; even, so far as we could conjecture, for those indicated special
 senses which made the Old Ones partly though imperfectly independent 
of light in emergencies. In fact, we were somewhat apprehensive lest w
e go astray ourselves in our haste. For we had, of course, decided to 
keep straight on toward the dead city; since the consequences of loss 
in those unknown foothill honeycombings would be unthinkable. The fact
 that we survived and emerged is sufficient proof that the thing did t
ake a wrong gallery whilst we providentially hit on the right one. The
 penguins alone could not have saved us, but in conjunction with the m
ist they seem to have done so. Only a benign fate kept the curling vap
ours thick enough at the right moment, for they were constantly shifti
ng and threatening to vanish. Indeed, they did lift for a second just 
before we emerged from the nauseously re-sculptured tunnel into the ca
ve; so that we actually caught one first and only half-glimpse of the 
oncoming entity as we cast a final, desperately fearful glance backwar
d before dimming the torch and mixing with the penguins in the hope of
 dodging pursuit. If the fate which screened us was benign, that which
 gave us the half-glimpse was infinitely the opposite; for to that fla
sh of semi-vision can be traced a full half of the horror which has ev
er since haunted us. Our exact motive in looking back again was perhap
s no more than the immemorial instinct of the pursued to gauge the nat
ure and course of its pursuer; or perhaps it was an automatic attempt 
to answer a subconscious question raised by one of our senses. In the 
midst of our flight, with all our faculties centred on the problem of 
escape, we were in no condition to observe and analyse details; yet ev
en so our latent brain-cells must have wondered at the message brought
 them by our nostrils. Afterward we realised what it was‚Äîthat our re
treat from the foetid slime-coating on those headless obstructions, an
d the coincident approach of the pursuing entity, had not brought us t
he exchange of stenches which logic called for. In the neighbourhood o
f the prostrate things that new and lately unexplainable foetor had be
en wholly dominant; but by this time it ought to have largely given pl
ace to the nameless stench associated with those others. This it had n
ot done‚Äîfor instead, the newer and less bearable smell was now virtu
ally undiluted, and growing more and more poisonously insistent each s
econd. So we glanced back‚Äîsimultaneously, it would appear; though no
 doubt the incipient motion of one prompted the imitation of the other
. As we did so we flashed both torches full strength at the momentaril
y thinned mist; either from sheer primitive anxiety to see all we coul
d, or in a less primitive but equally unconscious effort to dazzle the
 entity before we dimmed our light and dodged among the penguins of th
e labyrinth-centre ahead. Unhappy act! Not Orpheus himself, or Lot‚Äôs
 wife, paid much more dearly for a backward glance. And again came tha
t shocking, wide-ranged piping‚Äî‚ÄúTekeli-li! Tekeli-li!‚Äù I might a
s well be frank‚Äîeven if I cannot bear to be quite direct‚Äîin statin
g what we saw; though at the time we felt that it was not to be admitt
ed even to each other. The words reaching the reader can never even su
ggest the awfulness of the sight itself. It crippled our consciousness
 so completely that I wonder we had the residual sense to dim our torc
hes as planned, and to strike the right tunnel toward the dead city. I
nstinct alone must have carried us through‚Äîperhaps better than reaso
n could have done; though if that was what saved us, we paid a high pr
ice. Of reason we certainly had little enough left. Danforth was total
ly unstrung, and the first thing I remember of the rest of the journey
 was hearing him light-headedly chant an hysterical formula in which I
 alone of mankind could have found anything but insane irrelevance. It
 reverberated in falsetto echoes among the squawks of the penguins; re
verberated through the vaultings ahead, and‚Äîthank God‚Äîthrough the 
now empty vaultings behind. He could not have begun it at once‚Äîelse 
we would not have been alive and blindly racing. I shudder to think of
 what a shade of difference in his nervous reactions might have brough
t. ‚ÄúSouth Station Under‚ÄîWashington Under‚ÄîPark Street Under‚ÄîKen
dall‚ÄîCentral‚ÄîHarvard. . . .‚Äù The poor fellow was chanting the fa
miliar stations of the Boston-Cambridge tunnel that burrowed through o
ur peaceful native soil thousands of miles away in New England, yet to
 me the ritual had neither irrelevance nor home-feeling. It had only h
orror, because I knew unerringly the monstrous, nefandous analogy that
 had suggested it. We had expected, upon looking back, to see a terrib
le and incredibly moving entity if the mists were thin enough; but of 
that entity we had formed a clear idea. What we did see‚Äîfor the mist
s were indeed all too malignly thinned‚Äîwas something altogether diff
erent, and immeasurably more hideous and detestable. It was the utter,
 objective embodiment of the fantastic novelist‚Äôs ‚Äòthing that shou
ld not be‚Äô; and its nearest comprehensible analogue is a vast, onrus
hing subway train as one sees it from a station platform‚Äîthe great b
lack front looming colossally out of infinite subterraneous distance, 
constellated with strangely coloured lights and filling the prodigious
 burrow as a piston fills a cylinder. But we were not on a station pla
tform. We were on the track ahead as the nightmare plastic column of f
oetid black iridescence oozed tightly onward through its fifteen-foot 
sinus; gathering unholy speed and driving before it a spiral, re-thick
ening cloud of the pallid abyss-vapour. It was a terrible, indescribab
le thing vaster than any subway train‚Äîa shapeless congeries of proto
plasmic bubbles, faintly self-luminous, and with myriads of temporary 
eyes forming and unforming as pustules of greenish light all over the 
tunnel-filling front that bore down upon us, crushing the frantic peng
uins and slithering over the glistening floor that it and its kind had
 swept so evilly free of all litter. Still came that eldritch, mocking
 cry‚Äî‚ÄúTekeli-li! Tekeli-li!‚Äù And at last we remembered that the 
daemoniac shoggoths‚Äîgiven life, thought, and plastic organ patterns 
solely by the Old Ones, and having no language save that which the dot
-groups expressed‚Äîhad likewise no voice save the imitated accents of
 their bygone masters. XII. Danforth and I have recollections of emerg
ing into the great sculptured hemisphere and of threading our back tra
il through the Cyclopean rooms and corridors of the dead city; yet the
se are purely dream-fragments involving no memory of volition, details
, or physical exertion. It was as if we floated in a nebulous world or
 dimension without time, causation, or orientation. The grey half-dayl
ight of the vast circular space sobered us somewhat; but we did not go
 near those cached sledges or look again at poor Gedney and the dog. T
hey have a strange and titanic mausoleum, and I hope the end of this p
lanet will find them still undisturbed. It was while struggling up the
 colossal spiral incline that we first felt the terrible fatigue and s
hort breath which our race through the thin plateau air had produced; 
but not even the fear of collapse could make us pause before reaching 
the normal outer realm of sun and sky. There was something vaguely app
ropriate about our departure from those buried epochs; for as we wound
 our panting way up the sixty-foot cylinder of primal masonry we glimp
sed beside us a continuous procession of heroic sculptures in the dead
 race‚Äôs early and undecayed technique‚Äîa farewell from the Old Ones
, written fifty million years ago. Finally scrambling out at the top, 
we found ourselves on a great mound of tumbled blocks; with the curved
 walls of higher stonework rising westward, and the brooding peaks of 
the great mountains shewing beyond the more crumbled structures toward
 the east. The low antarctic sun of midnight peered redly from the sou
thern horizon through rifts in the jagged ruins, and the terrible age 
and deadness of the nightmare city seemed all the starker by contrast 
with such relatively known and accustomed things as the features of th
e polar landscape. The sky above was a churning and opalescent mass of
 tenuous ice-vapours, and the cold clutched at our vitals. Wearily res
ting the outfit-bags to which we had instinctively clung throughout ou
r desperate flight, we rebuttoned our heavy garments for the stumbling
 climb down the mound and the walk through the aeon-old stone maze to 
the foothills where our a√´roplane waited. Of what had set us fleeing 
from the darkness of earth‚Äôs secret and archaic gulfs we said nothin
g at all. In less than a quarter of an hour we had found the steep gra
de to the foothills‚Äîthe probable ancient terrace‚Äîby which we had d
escended, and could see the dark bulk of our great plane amidst the sp
arse ruins on the rising slope ahead. Half way uphill toward our goal 
we paused for a momentary breathing-spell, and turned to look again at
 the fantastic palaeogean tangle of incredible stone shapes below us‚Ä
îonce more outlined mystically against an unknown west. As we did so w
e saw that the sky beyond had lost its morning haziness; the restless 
ice-vapours having moved up to the zenith, where their mocking outline
s seemed on the point of settling into some bizarre pattern which they
 feared to make quite definite or conclusive. There now lay revealed o
n the ultimate white horizon behind the grotesque city a dim, elfin li
ne of pinnacled violet whose needle-pointed heights loomed dream-like 
against the beckoning rose-colour of the western sky. Up toward this s
himmering rim sloped the ancient table-land, the depressed course of t
he bygone river traversing it as an irregular ribbon of shadow. For a 
second we gasped in admiration of the scene‚Äôs unearthly cosmic beaut
y, and then vague horror began to creep into our souls. For this far v
iolet line could be nothing else than the terrible mountains of the fo
rbidden land‚Äîhighest of earth‚Äôs peaks and focus of earth‚Äôs evil;
 harbourers of nameless horrors and Archaean secrets; shunned and pray
ed to by those who feared to carve their meaning; untrodden by any liv
ing thing of earth, but visited by the sinister lightnings and sending
 strange beams across the plains in the polar night‚Äîbeyond doubt the
 unknown archetype of that dreaded Kadath in the Cold Waste beyond abh
orrent Leng, whereof unholy primal legends hint evasively. We were the
 first human beings ever to see them‚Äîand I hope to God we may be the
 last. If the sculptured maps and pictures in that pre-human city had 
told truly, these cryptic violet mountains could not be much less than
 300 miles away; yet none the less sharply did their dim elfin essence
 jut above that remote and snowy rim, like the serrated edge of a mons
trous alien planet about to rise into unaccustomed heavens. Their heig
ht, then, must have been tremendous beyond all known comparison‚Äîcarr
ying them up into tenuous atmospheric strata peopled by such gaseous w
raiths as rash flyers have barely lived to whisper of after unexplaina
ble falls. Looking at them, I thought nervously of certain sculptured 
hints of what the great bygone river had washed down into the city fro
m their accursed slopes‚Äîand wondered how much sense and how much fol
ly had lain in the fears of those Old Ones who carved them so reticent
ly. I recalled how their northerly end must come near the coast at Que
en Mary Land, where even at that moment Sir Douglas Mawson‚Äôs expedit
ion was doubtless working less than a thousand miles away; and hoped t
hat no evil fate would give Sir Douglas and his men a glimpse of what 
might lie beyond the protecting coastal range. Such thoughts formed a 
measure of my overwrought condition at the time‚Äîand Danforth seemed 
to be even worse. Yet long before we had passed the great star-shaped 
ruin and reached our plane our fears had become transferred to the les
ser but vast enough range whose re-crossing lay ahead of us. From thes
e foothills the black, ruin-crusted slopes reared up starkly and hideo
usly against the east, again reminding us of those strange Asian paint
ings of Nicholas Roerich; and when we thought of the damnable honeycom
bs inside them, and of the frightful amorphous entities that might hav
e pushed their foetidly squirming way even to the topmost hollow pinna
cles, we could not face without panic the prospect of again sailing by
 those suggestive skyward cave-mouths where the wind made sounds like 
an evil musical piping over a wide range. To make matters worse, we sa
w distinct traces of local mist around several of the summits‚Äîas poo
r Lake must have done when he made that early mistake about volcanism‚
Äîand thought shiveringly of that kindred mist from which we had just 
escaped; of that, and of the blasphemous, horror-fostering abyss whenc
e all such vapours came. All was well with the plane, and we clumsily 
hauled on our heavy flying furs. Danforth got the engine started witho
ut trouble, and we made a very smooth takeoff over the nightmare city.
 Below us the primal Cyclopean masonry spread out as it had done when 
first we saw it‚Äîso short, yet infinitely long, a time ago‚Äîand we b
egan rising and turning to test the wind for our crossing through the 
pass. At a very high level there must have been great disturbance, sin
ce the ice-dust clouds of the zenith were doing all sorts of fantastic
 things; but at 24,000 feet, the height we needed for the pass, we fou
nd navigation quite practicable. As we drew close to the jutting peaks
 the wind‚Äôs strange piping again became manifest, and I could see Da
nforth‚Äôs hands trembling at the controls. Rank amateur though I was,
 I thought at that moment that I might be a better navigator than he i
n effecting the dangerous crossing between pinnacles; and when I made 
motions to change seats and take over his duties he did not protest. I
 tried to keep all my skill and self-possession about me, and stared a
t the sector of reddish farther sky betwixt the walls of the pass‚Äîre
solutely refusing to pay attention to the puffs of mountain-top vapour
, and wishing that I had wax-stopped ears like Ulysses‚Äô men off the 
Sirens‚Äô coast to keep that disturbing wind-piping from my consciousn
ess. But Danforth, released from his piloting and keyed up to a danger
ous nervous pitch, could not keep quiet. I felt him turning and wriggl
ing about as he looked back at the terrible receding city, ahead at th
e cave-riddled, cube-barnacled peaks, sidewise at the bleak sea of sno
wy, rampart-strown foothills, and upward at the seething, grotesquely 
clouded sky. It was then, just as I was trying to steer safely through
 the pass, that his mad shrieking brought us so close to disaster by s
hattering my tight hold on myself and causing me to fumble helplessly 
with the controls for a moment. A second afterward my resolution trium
phed and we made the crossing safely‚Äîyet I am afraid that Danforth w
ill never be the same again. I have said that Danforth refused to tell
 me what final horror made him scream out so insanely‚Äîa horror which
, I feel sadly sure, is mainly responsible for his present breakdown. 
We had snatches of shouted conversation above the wind‚Äôs piping and 
the engine‚Äôs buzzing as we reached the safe side of the range and sw
ooped slowly down toward the camp, but that had mostly to do with the 
pledges of secrecy we had made as we prepared to leave the nightmare c
ity. Certain things, we had agreed, were not for people to know and di
scuss lightly‚Äîand I would not speak of them now but for the need of 
heading off that Starkweather-Moore Expedition, and others, at any cos
t. It is absolutely necessary, for the peace and safety of mankind, th
at some of earth‚Äôs dark, dead corners and unplumbed depths be let al
one; lest sleeping abnormalities wake to resurgent life, and blasphemo
usly surviving nightmares squirm and splash out of their black lairs t
o newer and wider conquests. All that Danforth has ever hinted is that
 the final horror was a mirage. It was not, he declares, anything conn
ected with the cubes and caves of echoing, vaporous, wormily honeycomb
ed mountains of madness which we crossed; but a single fantastic, daem
oniac glimpse, among the churning zenith-clouds, of what lay back of t
hose other violet westward mountains which the Old Ones had shunned an
d feared. It is very probable that the thing was a sheer delusion born
 of the previous stresses we had passed through, and of the actual tho
ugh unrecognised mirage of the dead transmontane city experienced near
 Lake‚Äôs camp the day before; but it was so real to Danforth that he 
suffers from it still. He has on rare occasions whispered disjointed a
nd irresponsible things about ‚Äúthe black pit‚Äù, ‚Äúthe carven rim‚Ä
ù, ‚Äúthe proto-shoggoths‚Äù, ‚Äúthe windowless solids with five dimen
sions‚Äù, ‚Äúthe nameless cylinder‚Äù, ‚Äúthe elder pharos‚Äù, ‚ÄúYog-
Sothoth‚Äù, ‚Äúthe primal white jelly‚Äù, ‚Äúthe colour out of space‚Ä
ù, ‚Äúthe wings‚Äù, ‚Äúthe eyes in darkness‚Äù, ‚Äúthe moon-ladder‚Äù,
 ‚Äúthe original, the eternal, the undying‚Äù, and other bizarre conce
ptions; but when he is fully himself he repudiates all this and attrib
utes it to his curious and macabre reading of earlier years. Danforth,
 indeed, is known to be among the few who have ever dared go completel
y through that worm-riddled copy of the Necronomicon kept under lock a
nd key in the college library. The higher sky, as we crossed the range
, was surely vaporous and disturbed enough; and although I did not see
 the zenith I can well imagine that its swirls of ice-dust may have ta
ken strange forms. Imagination, knowing how vividly distant scenes can
 sometimes be reflected, refracted, and magnified by such layers of re
stless cloud, might easily have supplied the rest‚Äîand of course Danf
orth did not hint any of those specific horrors till after his memory 
had had a chance to draw on his bygone reading. He could never have se
en so much in one instantaneous glance. At the time his shrieks were c
onfined to the repetition of a single mad word of all too obvious sour
ce: ‚ÄúTekeli-li! Tekeli-li!‚Äù 