I. The Horror in Clay. The most merciful thing in the world, I think, 
is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents. We l
ive on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infi
nity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far. The sciences, ea
ch straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but
 some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up s
uch terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therei
n, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the de
adly light into the peace and safety of a new dark age. Theosophists h
ave guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our wo
rld and human race form transient incidents. They have hinted at stran
ge survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if not masked by a 
bland optimism. But it is not from them that there came the single gli
mpse of forbidden aeons which chills me when I think of it and maddens
 me when I dream of it. That glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth
, flashed out from an accidental piecing together of separated things‚
Äîin this case an old newspaper item and the notes of a dead professor
. I hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out; certainly,
 if I live, I shall never knowingly supply a link in so hideous a chai
n. I think that the professor, too, intended to keep silent regarding 
the part he knew, and that he would have destroyed his notes had not s
udden death seized him. My knowledge of the thing began in the winter 
of 1926‚Äì27 with the death of my grand-uncle George Gammell Angell, P
rofessor Emeritus of Semitic Languages in Brown University, Providence
, Rhode Island. Professor Angell was widely known as an authority on a
ncient inscriptions, and had frequently been resorted to by the heads 
of prominent museums; so that his passing at the age of ninety-two may
 be recalled by many. Locally, interest was intensified by the obscuri
ty of the cause of death. The professor had been stricken whilst retur
ning from the Newport boat; falling suddenly, as witnesses said, after
 having been jostled by a nautical-looking negro who had come from one
 of the queer dark courts on the precipitous hillside which formed a s
hort cut from the waterfront to the deceased‚Äôs home in Williams Stre
et. Physicians were unable to find any visible disorder, but concluded
 after perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the heart, induced
 by the brisk ascent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was respo
nsible for the end. At the time I saw no reason to dissent from this d
ictum, but latterly I am inclined to wonder‚Äîand more than wonder. As
 my grand-uncle‚Äôs heir and executor, for he died a childless widower
, I was expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness; and for
 that purpose moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters i
n Boston. Much of the material which I correlated will be later publis
hed by the American Archaeological Society, but there was one box whic
h I found exceedingly puzzling, and which I felt much averse from shew
ing to other eyes. It had been locked, and I did not find the key till
 it occurred to me to examine the personal ring which the professor ca
rried always in his pocket. Then indeed I succeeded in opening it, but
 when I did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater and more clos
ely locked barrier. For what could be the meaning of the queer clay ba
s-relief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which I 
found? Had my uncle, in his latter years, become credulous of the most
 superficial impostures? I resolved to search out the eccentric sculpt
or responsible for this apparent disturbance of an old man‚Äôs peace o
f mind. The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick a
nd about five by six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. Its d
esigns, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; fo
r although the vagaries of cubism and futurism are many and wild, they
 do not often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehist
oric writing. And writing of some kind the bulk of these designs seeme
d certainly to be; though my memory, despite much familiarity with the
 papers and collections of my uncle, failed in any way to identify thi
s particular species, or even to hint at its remotest affiliations. Ab
ove these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently pictorial i
ntent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea 
of its nature. It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representi
ng a monster, of a form which only a diseased fancy could conceive. If
 I say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous p
ictures of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, I shall not b
e unfaithful to the spirit of the thing. A pulpy, tentacled head surmo
unted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings; but it was th
e general outline of the whole which made it most shockingly frightful
. Behind the figure was a vague suggestion of a Cyclopean architectura
l background. The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a s
tack of press cuttings, in Professor Angell‚Äôs most recent hand; and 
made no pretence to literary style. What seemed to be the main documen
t was headed ‚ÄúCTHULHU CULT‚Äù in characters painstakingly printed to
 avoid the erroneous reading of a word so unheard-of. The manuscript w
as divided into two sections, the first of which was headed ‚Äú1925‚Äî
Dream and Dream Work of H. A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas St., Providence, R.I.‚Ä
ù, and the second, ‚ÄúNarrative of Inspector John R. Legrasse, 121 Bie
nville St., New Orleans, La., at 1908 A. A. S. Mtg.‚ÄîNotes on Same, &
 Prof. Webb‚Äôs Acct.‚Äù The other manuscript papers were all brief no
tes, some of them accounts of the queer dreams of different persons, s
ome of them citations from theosophical books and magazines (notably W
. Scott-Elliot‚Äôs Atlantis and the Lost Lemuria), and the rest commen
ts on long-surviving secret societies and hidden cults, with reference
s to passages in such mythological and anthropological source-books as
 Frazer‚Äôs Golden Bough and Miss Murray‚Äôs Witch-Cult in Western Eur
ope. The cuttings largely alluded to outr√© mental illnesses and outbr
eaks of group folly or mania in the spring of 1925. The first half of 
the principal manuscript told a very peculiar tale. It appears that on
 March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic and excited aspec
t had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay bas-relie
f, which was then exceedingly damp and fresh. His card bore the name o
f Henry Anthony Wilcox, and my uncle had recognised him as the younges
t son of an excellent family slightly known to him, who had latterly b
een studying sculpture at the Rhode Island School of Design and living
 alone at the Fleur-de-Lys Building near that institution. Wilcox was 
a precocious youth of known genius but great eccentricity, and had fro
m childhood excited attention through the strange stories and odd drea
ms he was in the habit of relating. He called himself ‚Äúpsychically h
ypersensitive‚Äù, but the staid folk of the ancient commercial city di
smissed him as merely ‚Äúqueer‚Äù. Never mingling much with his kind, 
he had dropped gradually from social visibility, and was now known onl
y to a small group of aesthetes from other towns. Even the Providence 
Art Club, anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found him quite ho
peless. On the occasion of the visit, ran the professor‚Äôs manuscript
, the sculptor abruptly asked for the benefit of his host‚Äôs archaeol
ogical knowledge in identifying the hieroglyphics on the bas-relief. H
e spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienated
 sympathy; and my uncle shewed some sharpness in replying, for the con
spicuous freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything but arc
haeology. Young Wilcox‚Äôs rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough 
to make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poet
ic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and which I h
ave since found highly characteristic of him. He said, ‚ÄúIt is new, i
ndeed, for I made it last night in a dream of strange cities; and drea
ms are older than brooding Tyre, or the contemplative Sphinx, or garde
n-girdled Babylon.‚Äù It was then that he began that rambling tale whi
ch suddenly played upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest
 of my uncle. There had been a slight earthquake tremor the night befo
re, the most considerable felt in New England for some years; and Wilc
ox‚Äôs imagination had been keenly affected. Upon retiring, he had had
 an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of titan blocks and 
sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with la
tent horror. Hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from
 some undetermined point below had come a voice that was not a voice; 
a chaotic sensation which only fancy could transmute into sound, but w
hich he attempted to render by the almost unpronounceable jumble of le
tters, ‚ÄúCthulhu fhtagn‚Äù. This verbal jumble was the key to the rec
ollection which excited and disturbed Professor Angell. He questioned 
the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and studied with almost frant
ic intensity the bas-relief on which the youth had found himself worki
ng, chilled and clad only in his night-clothes, when waking had stolen
 bewilderingly over him. My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterward
 said, for his slowness in recognising both hieroglyphics and pictoria
l design. Many of his questions seemed highly out-of-place to his visi
tor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange c
ults or societies; and Wilcox could not understand the repeated promis
es of silence which he was offered in exchange for an admission of mem
bership in some widespread mystical or paganly religious body. When Pr
ofessor Angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant 
of any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with de
mands for future reports of dreams. This bore regular fruit, for after
 the first interview the manuscript records daily calls of the young m
an, during which he related startling fragments of nocturnal imagery w
hose burden was always some terrible Cyclopean vista of dark and dripp
ing stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting monotonous
ly in enigmatical sense-impacts uninscribable save as gibberish. The t
wo sounds most frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters ‚
ÄúCthulhu‚Äù and ‚ÄúR‚Äôlyeh‚Äù. On March 23d, the manuscript continue
d, Wilcox failed to appear; and inquiries at his quarters revealed tha
t he had been stricken with an obscure sort of fever and taken to the 
home of his family in Waterman Street. He had cried out in the night, 
arousing several other artists in the building, and had manifested sin
ce then only alternations of unconsciousness and delirium. My uncle at
 once telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close wat
ch of the case; calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr. Tobey
, whom he learned to be in charge. The youth‚Äôs febrile mind, apparen
tly, was dwelling on strange things; and the doctor shuddered now and 
then as he spoke of them. They included not only a repetition of what 
he had formerly dreamed, but touched wildly on a gigantic thing ‚Äúmil
es high‚Äù which walked or lumbered about. He at no time fully describ
ed this object, but occasional frantic words, as repeated by Dr. Tobey
, convinced the professor that it must be identical with the nameless 
monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dream-sculpture. Reference 
to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the youn
g man‚Äôs subsidence into lethargy. His temperature, oddly enough, was
 not greatly above normal; but his whole condition was otherwise such 
as to suggest true fever rather than mental disorder. On April 2nd at 
about 3 p.m. every trace of Wilcox‚Äôs malady suddenly ceased. He sat 
upright in bed, astonished to find himself at home and completely igno
rant of what had happened in dream or reality since the night of March
 22nd. Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters i
n three days; but to Professor Angell he was of no further assistance.
 All traces of strange dreaming had vanished with his recovery, and my
 uncle kept no record of his night-thoughts after a week of pointless 
and irrelevant accounts of thoroughly usual visions. Here the first pa
rt of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the scattered
 notes gave me much material for thought‚Äîso much, in fact, that only
 the ingrained scepticism then forming my philosophy can account for m
y continued distrust of the artist. The notes in question were those d
escriptive of the dreams of various persons covering the same period a
s that in which young Wilcox had had his strange visitations. My uncle
, it seems, had quickly instituted a prodigiously far-flung body of in
quiries amongst nearly all the friends whom he could question without 
impertinence, asking for nightly reports of their dreams, and the date
s of any notable visions for some time past. The reception of his requ
est seems to have been varied; but he must, at the very least, have re
ceived more responses than any ordinary man could have handled without
 a secretary. This original correspondence was not preserved, but his 
notes formed a thorough and really significant digest. Average people 
in society and business‚ÄîNew England‚Äôs traditional ‚Äúsalt of the e
arth‚Äù‚Äîgave an almost completely negative result, though scattered 
cases of uneasy but formless nocturnal impressions appear here and the
re, always between March 23d and April 2nd‚Äîthe period of young Wilco
x‚Äôs delirium. Scientific men were little more affected, though four 
cases of vague description suggest fugitive glimpses of strange landsc
apes, and in one case there is mentioned a dread of something abnormal
. It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, a
nd I know that panic would have broken loose had they been able to com
pare notes. As it was, lacking their original letters, I half suspecte
d the compiler of having asked leading questions, or of having edited 
the correspondence in corroboration of what he had latently resolved t
o see. That is why I continued to feel that Wilcox, somehow cognisant 
of the old data which my uncle had possessed, had been imposing on the
 veteran scientist. These responses from aesthetes told a disturbing t
ale. From February 28th to April 2nd a large proportion of them had dr
eamed very bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams being immeasura
bly the stronger during the period of the sculptor‚Äôs delirium. Over 
a fourth of those who reported anything, reported scenes and half-soun
ds not unlike those which Wilcox had described; and some of the dreame
rs confessed acute fear of the gigantic nameless thing visible toward 
the last. One case, which the note describes with emphasis, was very s
ad. The subject, a widely known architect with leanings toward theosop
hy and occultism, went violently insane on the date of young Wilcox‚Äô
s seizure, and expired several months later after incessant screamings
 to be saved from some escaped denizen of hell. Had my uncle referred 
to these cases by name instead of merely by number, I should have atte
mpted some corroboration and personal investigation; but as it was, I 
succeeded in tracing down only a few. All of these, however, bore out 
the notes in full. I have often wondered if all the objects of the pro
fessor‚Äôs questioning felt as puzzled as did this fraction. It is wel
l that no explanation shall ever reach them. The press cuttings, as I 
have intimated, touched on cases of panic, mania, and eccentricity dur
ing the given period. Professor Angell must have employed a cutting bu
reau, for the number of extracts was tremendous and the sources scatte
red throughout the globe. Here was a nocturnal suicide in London, wher
e a lone sleeper had leaped from a window after a shocking cry. Here l
ikewise a rambling letter to the editor of a paper in South America, w
here a fanatic deduces a dire future from visions he has seen. A despa
tch from California describes a theosophist colony as donning white ro
bes en masse for some ‚Äúglorious fulfilment‚Äù which never arrives, w
hilst items from India speak guardedly of serious native unrest toward
 the end of March. Voodoo orgies multiply in Hayti, and African outpos
ts report ominous mutterings. American officers in the Philippines fin
d certain tribes bothersome about this time, and New York policemen ar
e mobbed by hysterical Levantines on the night of March 22‚Äì23. The w
est of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumour and legendry, and a fantas
tic painter named Ardois-Bonnot hangs a blasphemous ‚ÄúDream Landscape
‚Äù in the Paris spring salon of 1926. And so numerous are the recorde
d troubles in insane asylums, that only a miracle can have stopped the
 medical fraternity from noting strange parallelisms and drawing mysti
fied conclusions. A weird bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at th
is date scarcely envisage the callous rationalism with which I set the
m aside. But I was then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the o
lder matters mentioned by the professor. II. The Tale of Inspector Leg
rasse. The older matters which had made the sculptor‚Äôs dream and bas
-relief so significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second ha
lf of his long manuscript. Once before, it appears, Professor Angell h
ad seen the hellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over
 the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which can 
be rendered only as ‚ÄúCthulhu‚Äù; and all this in so stirring and hor
rible a connexion that it is small wonder he pursued young Wilcox with
 queries and demands for data. The earlier experience had come in 1908
, seventeen years before, when the American Archaeological Society hel
d its annual meeting in St. Louis. Professor Angell, as befitted one o
f his authority and attainments, had had a prominent part in all the d
eliberations; and was one of the first to be approached by the several
 outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to offer questions fo
r correct answering and problems for expert solution. The chief of the
se outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the entire
 meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged man who had travelled 
all the way from New Orleans for certain special information unobtaina
ble from any local source. His name was John Raymond Legrasse, and he 
was by profession an Inspector of Police. With him he bore the subject
 of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and apparently very ancient sto
ne statuette whose origin he was at a loss to determine. It must not b
e fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interest in archaeolog
y. On the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was prompted by purely 
professional considerations. The statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever 
it was, had been captured some months before in the wooded swamps sout
h of New Orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting; and so si
ngular and hideous were the rites connected with it, that the police c
ould not but realise that they had stumbled on a dark cult totally unk
nown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of t
he African voodoo circles. Of its origin, apart from the erratic and u
nbelievable tales extorted from the captured members, absolutely nothi
ng was to be discovered; hence the anxiety of the police for any antiq
uarian lore which might help them to place the frightful symbol, and t
hrough it track down the cult to its fountain-head. Inspector Legrasse
 was scarcely prepared for the sensation which his offering created. O
ne sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of sc
ience into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowd
ing around him to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangenes
s and air of genuinely abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopene
d and archaic vistas. No recognised school of sculpture had animated t
his terrible object, yet centuries and even thousands of years seemed 
recorded in its dim and greenish surface of unplaceable stone. The fig
ure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and car
eful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exqui
sitely artistic workmanship. It represented a monster of vaguely anthr
opoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of 
feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and f
ore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. This thing, which seemed inst
inct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was of a somewhat bloat
ed corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or pedestal 
covered with undecipherable characters. The tips of the wings touched 
the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the centre, whilst the l
ong, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouching hind legs gripped the f
ront edge and extended a quarter of the way down toward the bottom of 
the pedestal. The cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends o
f the facial feelers brushed the backs of huge fore paws which clasped
 the croucher‚Äôs elevated knees. The aspect of the whole was abnormal
ly life-like, and the more subtly fearful because its source was so to
tally unknown. Its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakabl
e; yet not one link did it shew with any known type of art belonging t
o civilisation‚Äôs youth‚Äîor indeed to any other time. Totally separa
te and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the soapy, greenish
-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations resem
bled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy. The characters along t
he base were equally baffling; and no member present, despite a repres
entation of half the world‚Äôs expert learning in this field, could fo
rm the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship. They, l
ike the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote an
d distinct from mankind as we know it; something frightfully suggestiv
e of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our conc
eptions have no part. And yet, as the members severally shook their he
ads and confessed defeat at the Inspector‚Äôs problem, there was one m
an in that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre familiarity in t
he monstrous shape and writing, and who presently told with some diffi
dence of the odd trifle he knew. This person was the late William Chan
ning Webb, Professor of Anthropology in Princeton University, and an e
xplorer of no slight note. Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eigh
t years before, in a tour of Greenland and Iceland in search of some R
unic inscriptions which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on th
e West Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of deg
enerate Esquimaux whose religion, a curious form of devil-worship, chi
lled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. It wa
s a faith of which other Esquimaux knew little, and which they mention
ed only with shudders, saying that it had come down from horribly anci
ent aeons before ever the world was made. Besides nameless rites and h
uman sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary rituals addressed 
to a supreme elder devil or tornasuk; and of this Professor Webb had t
aken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok or wizard-priest, ex
pressing the sounds in Roman letters as best he knew how. But just now
 of prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished, a
nd around which they danced when the aurora leaped high over the ice c
liffs. It was, the professor stated, a very crude bas-relief of stone,
 comprising a hideous picture and some cryptic writing. And so far as 
he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features of th
e bestial thing now lying before the meeting. This data, received with
 suspense and astonishment by the assembled members, proved doubly exc
iting to Inspector Legrasse; and he began at once to ply his informant
 with questions. Having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swam
p cult-worshippers his men had arrested, he besought the professor to 
remember as best he might the syllables taken down amongst the diaboli
st Esquimaux. There then followed an exhaustive comparison of details,
 and a moment of really awed silence when both detective and scientist
 agreed on the virtual identity of the phrase common to two hellish ri
tuals so many worlds of distance apart. What, in substance, both the E
squimau wizards and the Louisiana swamp-priests had chanted to their k
indred idols was something very like this‚Äîthe word-divisions being g
uessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted aloud: ‚ÄúP
h‚Äônglui mglw‚Äônafh Cthulhu R‚Äôlyeh wgah‚Äônagl fhtagn.‚Äù Legrasse
 had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several among his mon
grel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them
 the words meant. This text, as given, ran something like this: ‚ÄúIn 
his house at R‚Äôlyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.‚Äù And now, in resp
onse to a general and urgent demand, Inspector Legrasse related as ful
ly as possible his experience with the swamp worshippers; telling a st
ory to which I could see my uncle attached profound significance. It s
avoured of the wildest dreams of myth-maker and theosophist, and discl
osed an astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such half-caste
s and pariahs as might be least expected to possess it. On November 1s
t, 1907, there had come to the New Orleans police a frantic summons fr
om the swamp and lagoon country to the south. The squatters there, mos
tly primitive but good-natured descendants of Lafitte‚Äôs men, were in
 the grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolen upon 
them in the night. It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more ter
rible sort than they had ever known; and some of their women and child
ren had disappeared since the malevolent tom-tom had begun its incessa
nt beating far within the black haunted woods where no dweller venture
d. There were insane shouts and harrowing screams, soul-chilling chant
s and dancing devil-flames; and, the frightened messenger added, the p
eople could stand it no more. So a body of twenty police, filling two 
carriages and an automobile, had set out in the late afternoon with th
e shivering squatter as a guide. At the end of the passable road they 
alighted, and for miles splashed on in silence through the terrible cy
press woods where day never came. Ugly roots and malignant hanging noo
ses of Spanish moss beset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones
 or fragment of a rotting wall intensified by its hint of morbid habit
ation a depression which every malformed tree and every fungous islet 
combined to create. At length the squatter settlement, a miserable hud
dle of huts, hove in sight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster
 around the group of bobbing lanterns. The muffled beat of tom-toms wa
s now faintly audible far, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at in
frequent intervals when the wind shifted. A reddish glare, too, seemed
 to filter through the pale undergrowth beyond endless avenues of fore
st night. Reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed
 squatters refused point-blank to advance another inch toward the scen
e of unholy worship, so Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen colleagues
 plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none of them ha
d ever trod before. The region now entered by the police was one of tr
aditionally evil repute, substantially unknown and untraversed by whit
e men. There were legends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight,
 in which dwelt a huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous ey
es; and squatters whispered that bat-winged devils flew up out of cave
rns in inner earth to worship it at midnight. They said it had been th
ere before D‚ÄôIberville, before La Salle, before the Indians, and bef
ore even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods. It was nightmare
 itself, and to see it was to die. But it made men dream, and so they 
knew enough to keep away. The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the 
merest fringe of this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough;
 hence perhaps the very place of the worship had terrified the squatte
rs more than the shocking sounds and incidents. Only poetry or madness
 could do justice to the noises heard by Legrasse‚Äôs men as they plou
ghed on through the black morass toward the red glare and the muffled 
tom-toms. There are vocal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualiti
es peculiar to beasts; and it is terrible to hear the one when the sou
rce should yield the other. Animal fury and orgiastic licence here whi
pped themselves to daemoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstasies 
that tore and reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilenti
al tempests from the gulfs of hell. Now and then the less organised ul
ulation would cease, and from what seemed a well-drilled chorus of hoa
rse voices would rise in sing-song chant that hideous phrase or ritual
: ‚ÄúPh‚Äônglui mglw‚Äônafh Cthulhu R‚Äôlyeh wgah‚Äônagl fhtagn.‚Äù Th
en the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came s
uddenly in sight of the spectacle itself. Four of them reeled, one fai
nted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophony o
f the orgy fortunately deadened. Legrasse dashed swamp water on the fa
ce of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and nearly hypnotised 
with horror. In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of 
perhaps an acre‚Äôs extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. On this 
now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality
 than any but a Sime or an Angarola could paint. Void of clothing, thi
s hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing, and writhing about a monstrous
 ring-shaped bonfire; in the centre of which, revealed by occasional r
ifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eigh
t feet in height; on top of which, incongruous with its diminutiveness
, rested the noxious carven statuette. From a wide circle of ten scaff
olds set up at regular intervals with the flame-girt monolith as a cen
tre hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squat
ters who had disappeared. It was inside this circle that the ring of w
orshippers jumped and roared, the general direction of the mass motion
 being from left to right in endless Bacchanal between the ring of bod
ies and the ring of fire. It may have been only imagination and it may
 have been only echoes which induced one of the men, an excitable Span
iard, to fancy he heard antiphonal responses to the ritual from some f
ar and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient legendry and
 horror. This man, Joseph D. Galvez, I later met and questioned; and h
e proved distractingly imaginative. He indeed went so far as to hint o
f the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes a
nd a mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest trees‚Äîbut I suppose 
he had been hearing too much native superstition. Actually, the horrif
ied pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration. Duty came fi
rst; and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel celebr
ants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged de
terminedly into the nauseous rout. For five minutes the resultant din 
and chaos were beyond description. Wild blows were struck, shots were 
fired, and escapes were made; but in the end Legrasse was able to coun
t some forty-seven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to dress in haste 
and fall into line between two rows of policemen. Five of the worshipp
ers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away on impro
vised stretchers by their fellow-prisoners. The image on the monolith,
 of course, was carefully removed and carried back by Legrasse. Examin
ed at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the p
risoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded, and mental
ly aberrant type. Most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroes and mu
lattoes, largely West Indians or Brava Portuguese from the Cape Verde 
Islands, gave a colouring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult. But 
before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something fa
r deeper and older than negro fetichism was involved. Degraded and ign
orant as they were, the creatures held with surprising consistency to 
the central idea of their loathsome faith. They worshipped, so they sa
id, the Great Old Ones who lived ages before there were any men, and w
ho came to the young world out of the sky. Those Old Ones were gone no
w, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had told 
their secrets in dreams to the first men, who formed a cult which had 
never died. This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always e
xisted and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark place
s all over the world until the time when the great priest Cthulhu, fro
m his dark house in the mighty city of R‚Äôlyeh under the waters, shou
ld rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway. Some day he would 
call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would always be w
aiting to liberate him. Meanwhile no more must be told. There was a se
cret which even torture could not extract. Mankind was not absolutely 
alone among the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out of the 
dark to visit the faithful few. But these were not the Great Old Ones.
 No man had ever seen the Old Ones. The carven idol was great Cthulhu,
 but none might say whether or not the others were precisely like him.
 No one could read the old writing now, but things were told by word o
f mouth. The chanted ritual was not the secret‚Äîthat was never spoken
 aloud, only whispered. The chant meant only this: ‚ÄúIn his house at 
R‚Äôlyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.‚Äù Only two of the prisoners wer
e found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest were committed to vario
us institutions. All denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred 
that the killing had been done by Black Winged Ones which had come to 
them from their immemorial meeting-place in the haunted wood. But of t
hose mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained. What 
the police did extract, came mainly from an immensely aged mestizo nam
ed Castro, who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with
 undying leaders of the cult in the mountains of China. Old Castro rem
embered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of theosoph
ists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed. Ther
e had been aeons when other Things ruled on the earth, and They had ha
d great cities. Remains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen had to
ld him, were still to be found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the P
acific. They all died vast epochs of time before men came, but there w
ere arts which could revive Them when the stars had come round again t
o the right positions in the cycle of eternity. They had, indeed, come
 themselves from the stars, and brought Their images with Them. These 
Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogether of fles
h and blood. They had shape‚Äîfor did not this star-fashioned image pr
ove it?‚Äîbut that shape was not made of matter. When the stars were r
ight, They could plunge from world to world through the sky; but when 
the stars were wrong, They could not live. But although They no longer
 lived, They would never really die. They all lay in stone houses in T
heir great city of R‚Äôlyeh, preserved by the spells of mighty Cthulhu
 for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the earth might once m
ore be ready for Them. But at that time some force from outside must s
erve to liberate Their bodies. The spells that preserved Them intact l
ikewise prevented Them from making an initial move, and They could onl
y lie awake in the dark and think whilst uncounted millions of years r
olled by. They knew all that was occurring in the universe, but Their 
mode of speech was transmitted thought. Even now They talked in Their 
tombs. When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great 
Old Ones spoke to the sensitive among them by moulding their dreams; f
or only thus could Their language reach the fleshly minds of mammals. 
Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around small i
dols which the Great Ones shewed them; idols brought in dim aeras from
 dark stars. That cult would never die till the stars came right again
, and the secret priests would take great Cthulhu from His tomb to rev
ive His subjects and resume His rule of earth. The time would be easy 
to know, for then mankind would have become as the Great Old Ones; fre
e and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown aside
 and all men shouting and killing and revelling in joy. Then the liber
ated Old Ones would teach them new ways to shout and kill and revel an
d enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with a holocaust of 
ecstasy and freedom. Meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must ke
ep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadow forth the prophec
y of their return. In the elder time chosen men had talked with the en
tombed Old Ones in dreams, but then something had happened. The great 
stone city R‚Äôlyeh, with its monoliths and sepulchres, had sunk benea
th the waves; and the deep waters, full of the one primal mystery thro
ugh which not even thought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercou
rse. But memory never died, and high-priests said that the city would 
rise again when the stars were right. Then came out of the earth the b
lack spirits of earth, mouldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumours pic
ked up in caverns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. But of them old Castr
o dared not speak much. He cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount of
 persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direction. The size 
of the Old Ones, too, he curiously declined to mention. Of the cult, h
e said that he thought the centre lay amid the pathless deserts of Ara
bia, where Irem, the City of Pillars, dreams hidden and untouched. It 
was not allied to the European witch-cult, and was virtually unknown b
eyond its members. No book had ever really hinted of it, though the de
athless Chinamen said that there were double meanings in the Necronomi
con of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred which the initiated might read as t
hey chose, especially the much-discussed couplet: ‚ÄúThat is not dead 
which can eternal lie, And with strange aeons even death may die.‚Äù L
egrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquired in
 vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. Castro, appare
ntly, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly secret. The a
uthorities at Tulane University could shed no light upon either cult o
r image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorities in 
the country and met with no more than the Greenland tale of Professor 
Webb. The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse‚Äôs tal
e, corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequen
t correspondence of those who attended; although scant mention occurs 
in the formal publications of the society. Caution is the first care o
f those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and imposture. Legra
sse for some time lent the image to Professor Webb, but at the latter‚
Äôs death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where 
I viewed it not long ago. It is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakab
ly akin to the dream-sculpture of young Wilcox. That my uncle was exci
ted by the tale of the sculptor I did not wonder, for what thoughts mu
st arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had learned 
of the cult, of a sensitive young man who had dreamed not only the fig
ure and exact hieroglyphics of the swamp-found image and the Greenland
 devil tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the p
recise words of the formula uttered alike by Esquimau diabolists and m
ongrel Louisianans? Professor Angell‚Äôs instant start on an investiga
tion of the utmost thoroughness was eminently natural; though privatel
y I suspected young Wilcox of having heard of the cult in some indirec
t way, and of having invented a series of dreams to heighten and conti
nue the mystery at my uncle‚Äôs expense. The dream-narratives and cutt
ings collected by the professor were, of course, strong corroboration;
 but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the whole subj
ect led me to adopt what I thought the most sensible conclusions. So, 
after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the the
osophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of Legrass
e, I made a trip to Providence to see the sculptor and give him the re
buke I thought proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and aged m
an. Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in Thomas St
reet, a hideous Victorian imitation of seventeenth-century Breton arch
itecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely colonial h
ouses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of the finest Geo
rgian steeple in America. I found him at work in his rooms, and at onc
e conceded from the specimens scattered about that his genius is indee
d profound and authentic. He will, I believe, some time be heard from 
as one of the great decadents; for he has crystallised in clay and wil
l one day mirror in marble those nightmares and phantasies which Arthu
r Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith makes visible in vers
e and in painting. Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he tur
ned languidly at my knock and asked me my business without rising. Whe
n I told him who I was, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had e
xcited his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never expl
ained the reason for the study. I did not enlarge his knowledge in thi
s regard, but sought with some subtlety to draw him out. In a short ti
me I became convinced of his absolute sincerity, for he spoke of the d
reams in a manner none could mistake. They and their subconscious resi
duum had influenced his art profoundly, and he shewed me a morbid stat
ue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency of its black s
uggestion. He could not recall having seen the original of this thing 
except in his own dream bas-relief, but the outlines had formed themse
lves insensibly under his hands. It was, no doubt, the giant shape he 
had raved of in delirium. That he really knew nothing of the hidden cu
lt, save from what my uncle‚Äôs relentless catechism had let fall, he 
soon made clear; and again I strove to think of some way in which he c
ould possibly have received the weird impressions. He talked of his dr
eams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me see with terrible vividn
ess the damp Cyclopean city of slimy green stone‚Äîwhose geometry, he 
oddly said, was all wrong‚Äîand hear with frightened expectancy the ce
aseless, half-mental calling from underground: ‚ÄúCthulhu fhtagn‚Äù, ‚
ÄúCthulhu fhtagn‚Äù. These words had formed part of that dread ritual 
which told of dead Cthulhu‚Äôs dream-vigil in his stone vault at R‚Äôl
yeh, and I felt deeply moved despite my rational beliefs. Wilcox, I wa
s sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon forgott
en it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining. Late
r, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious ex
pression in dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible statue I no
w beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent
 one. The youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly 
ill-mannered, which I could never like; but I was willing enough now t
o admit both his genius and his honesty. I took leave of him amicably,
 and wish him all the success his talent promises. The matter of the c
ult still remained to fascinate me, and at times I had visions of pers
onal fame from researches into its origin and connexions. I visited Ne
w Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of that old-time raiding-pa
rty, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel 
prisoners as still survived. Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead 
for some years. What I now heard so graphically at first-hand, though 
it was really no more than a detailed confirmation of what my uncle ha
d written, excited me afresh; for I felt sure that I was on the track 
of a very real, very secret, and very ancient religion whose discovery
 would make me an anthropologist of note. My attitude was still one of
 absolute materialism, as I wish it still were, and I discounted with 
almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of the dream notes and 
odd cuttings collected by Professor Angell. One thing I began to suspe
ct, and which I now fear I know, is that my uncle‚Äôs death was far fr
om natural. He fell on a narrow hill street leading up from an ancient
 waterfront swarming with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from
 a negro sailor. I did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits 
of the cult-members in Louisiana, and would not be surprised to learn 
of secret methods and poison needles as ruthless and as anciently know
n as the cryptic rites and beliefs. Legrasse and his men, it is true, 
have been let alone; but in Norway a certain seaman who saw things is 
dead. Might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering th
e sculptor‚Äôs data have come to sinister ears? I think Professor Ange
ll died because he knew too much, or because he was likely to learn to
o much. Whether I shall go as he did remains to be seen, for I have le
arned much now. III. The Madness from the Sea. If heaven ever wishes t
o grant me a boon, it will be a total effacing of the results of a mer
e chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray piece of shelf-paper. I
t was nothing on which I would naturally have stumbled in the course o
f my daily round, for it was an old number of an Australian journal, t
he Sydney Bulletin for April 18, 1925. It had escaped even the cutting
 bureau which had at the time of its issuance been avidly collecting m
aterial for my uncle‚Äôs research. I had largely given over my inquiri
es into what Professor Angell called the ‚ÄúCthulhu Cult‚Äù, and was v
isiting a learned friend in Paterson, New Jersey; the curator of a loc
al museum and a mineralogist of note. Examining one day the reserve sp
ecimens roughly set on the storage shelves in a rear room of the museu
m, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one of the old papers spread
 beneath the stones. It was the Sydney Bulletin I have mentioned, for 
my friend has wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign parts; and 
the picture was a half-tone cut of a hideous stone image almost identi
cal with that which Legrasse had found in the swamp. Eagerly clearing 
the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the item in detail; and 
was disappointed to find it of only moderate length. What it suggested
, however, was of portentous significance to my flagging quest; and I 
carefully tore it out for immediate action. It read as follows: MYSTER
Y DERELICT FOUND AT SEA Vigilant Arrives With Helpless Armed New Zeala
nd Yacht in Tow. One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. Tale of Despe
rate Battle and Deaths at Sea. Rescued Seaman Refuses Particulars of S
trange Experience. Odd Idol Found in His Possession. Inquiry to Follow
. The Morrison Co.‚Äôs freighter Vigilant, bound from Valparaiso, arri
ved this morning at its wharf in Darling Harbour, having in tow the ba
ttled and disabled but heavily armed steam yacht Alert of Dunedin, N. 
Z., which was sighted April 12th in S. Latitude 34¬∞ 21‚Ä≤, W. Longitu
de 152¬∞ 17‚Ä≤ with one living and one dead man aboard. The Vigilant l
eft Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2nd was driven considerably so
uth of her course by exceptionally heavy storms and monster waves. On 
April 12th the derelict was sighted; and though apparently deserted, w
as found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a half-delirious con
dition and one man who had evidently been dead for more than a week. T
he living man was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown origin, a
bout a foot in height, regarding whose nature authorities at Sydney Un
iversity, the Royal Society, and the Museum in College Street all prof
ess complete bafflement, and which the survivor says he found in the c
abin of the yacht, in a small carved shrine of common pattern. This ma
n, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story of p
iracy and slaughter. He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian of some intell
igence, and had been second mate of the two-masted schooner Emma of Au
ckland, which sailed for Callao February 20th with a complement of ele
ven men. The Emma, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her
 course by the great storm of March 1st, and on March 22nd, in S. Lati
tude 49¬∞ 51‚Ä≤, W. Longitude 128¬∞ 34‚Ä≤, encountered the Alert, mann
ed by a queer and evil-looking crew of Kanakas and half-castes. Being 
ordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt. Collins refused; whereupon th
e strange crew began to fire savagely and without warning upon the sch
ooner with a peculiarly heavy battery of brass cannon forming part of 
the yacht‚Äôs equipment. The Emma‚Äôs men shewed fight, says the survi
vor, and though the schooner began to sink from shots beneath the wate
rline they managed to heave alongside their enemy and board her, grapp
ling with the savage crew on the yacht‚Äôs deck, and being forced to k
ill them all, the number being slightly superior, because of their par
ticularly abhorrent and desperate though rather clumsy mode of fightin
g. Three of the Emma‚Äôs men, including Capt. Collins and First Mate G
reen, were killed; and the remaining eight under Second Mate Johansen 
proceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their origina
l direction to see if any reason for their ordering back had existed. 
The next day, it appears, they raised and landed on a small island, al
though none is known to exist in that part of the ocean; and six of th
e men somehow died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent about t
his part of his story, and speaks only of their falling into a rock ch
asm. Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and tried
 to manage her, but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd. From 
that time till his rescue on the 12th the man remembers little, and he
 does not even recall when William Briden, his companion, died. Briden
‚Äôs death reveals no apparent cause, and was probably due to exciteme
nt or exposure. Cable advices from Dunedin report that the Alert was w
ell known there as an island trader, and bore an evil reputation along
 the waterfront. It was owned by a curious group of half-castes whose 
frequent meetings and night trips to the woods attracted no little cur
iosity; and it had set sail in great haste just after the storm and ea
rth tremors of March 1st. Our Auckland correspondent gives the Emma an
d her crew an excellent reputation, and Johansen is described as a sob
er and worthy man. The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whol
e matter beginning tomorrow, at which every effort will be made to ind
uce Johansen to speak more freely than he has done hitherto. This was 
all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train 
of ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries of data on th
e Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as w
ell as on land. What motive prompted the hybrid crew to order back the
 Emma as they sailed about with their hideous idol? What was the unkno
wn island on which six of the Emma‚Äôs crew had died, and about which 
the mate Johansen was so secretive? What had the vice-admiralty‚Äôs in
vestigation brought out, and what was known of the noxious cult in Dun
edin? And most marvellous of all, what deep and more than natural link
age of dates was this which gave a malign and now undeniable significa
nce to the various turns of events so carefully noted by my uncle? Mar
ch 1st‚Äîour February 28th according to the International Date Line‚Äî
the earthquake and storm had come. From Dunedin the Alert and her nois
ome crew had darted eagerly forth as if imperiously summoned, and on t
he other side of the earth poets and artists had begun to dream of a s
trange, dank Cyclopean city whilst a young sculptor had moulded in his
 sleep the form of the dreaded Cthulhu. March 23d the crew of the Emma
 landed on an unknown island and left six men dead; and on that date t
he dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightened vividness and darkened
 with dread of a giant monster‚Äôs malign pursuit, whilst an architect
 had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenly into delirium! And wh
at of this storm of April 2nd‚Äîthe date on which all dreams of the da
nk city ceased, and Wilcox emerged unharmed from the bondage of strang
e fever? What of all this‚Äîand of those hints of old Castro about the
 sunken, star-born Old Ones and their coming reign; their faithful cul
t and their mastery of dreams? Was I tottering on the brink of cosmic 
horrors beyond man‚Äôs power to bear? If so, they must be horrors of t
he mind alone, for in some way the second of April had put a stop to w
hatever monstrous menace had begun its siege of mankind‚Äôs soul. That
 evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade my host
 adieu and took a train for San Francisco. In less than a month I was 
in Dunedin; where, however, I found that little was known of the stran
ge cult-members who had lingered in the old sea-taverns. Waterfront sc
um was far too common for special mention; though there was vague talk
 about one inland trip these mongrels had made, during which faint dru
mming and red flame were noted on the distant hills. In Auckland I lea
rned that Johansen had returned with yellow hair turned white after a 
perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at Sydney, and had thereafter
 sold his cottage in West Street and sailed with his wife to his old h
ome in Oslo. Of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no m
ore than he had told the admiralty officials, and all they could do wa
s to give me his Oslo address. After that I went to Sydney and talked 
profitlessly with seamen and members of the vice-admiralty court. I sa
w the Alert, now sold and in commercial use, at Circular Quay in Sydne
y Cove, but gained nothing from its non-committal bulk. The crouching 
image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly wings, and hierogly
phed pedestal, was preserved in the Museum at Hyde Park; and I studied
 it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite workmansh
ip, and with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly
 strangeness of material which I had noted in Legrasse‚Äôs smaller spe
cimen. Geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzl
e; for they vowed that the world held no rock like it. Then I thought 
with a shudder of what old Castro had told Legrasse about the primal G
reat Ones: ‚ÄúThey had come from the stars, and had brought Their imag
es with Them.‚Äù Shaken with such a mental revolution as I had never b
efore known, I now resolved to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo. Sailing fo
r London, I re√´mbarked at once for the Norwegian capital; and one aut
umn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the Egeberg. Johan
sen‚Äôs address, I discovered, lay in the Old Town of King Harold Haar
drada, which kept alive the name of Oslo during all the centuries that
 the greater city masqueraded as ‚ÄúChristiana‚Äù. I made the brief tr
ip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the door of a neat 
and ancient building with plastered front. A sad-faced woman in black 
answered my summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she told
 me in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more. He had not su
rvived his return, said his wife, for the doings at sea in 1925 had br
oken him. He had told her no more than he had told the public, but had
 left a long manuscript‚Äîof ‚Äútechnical matters‚Äù as he said‚Äîwrit
ten in English, evidently in order to safeguard her from the peril of 
casual perusal. During a walk through a narrow lane near the Gothenbur
g dock, a bundle of papers falling from an attic window had knocked hi
m down. Two Lascar sailors at once helped him to his feet, but before 
the ambulance could reach him he was dead. Physicians found no adequat
e cause for the end, and laid it to heart trouble and a weakened const
itution. I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will n
ever leave me till I, too, am at rest; ‚Äúaccidentally‚Äù or otherwise
. Persuading the widow that my connexion with her husband‚Äôs ‚Äútechn
ical matters‚Äù was sufficient to entitle me to his manuscript, I bore
 the document away and began to read it on the London boat. It was a s
imple, rambling thing‚Äîa naive sailor‚Äôs effort at a post-facto diar
y‚Äîand strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage. I cannot a
ttempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its cloudiness and redundance,
 but I will tell its gist enough to shew why the sound of the water ag
ainst the vessel‚Äôs sides became so unendurable to me that I stopped 
my ears with cotton. Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even
 though he saw the city and the Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly 
again when I think of the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in
 time and in space, and of those unhallowed blasphemies from elder sta
rs which dream beneath the sea, known and favoured by a nightmare cult
 ready and eager to loose them on the world whenever another earthquak
e shall heave their monstrous stone city again to the sun and air. Joh
ansen‚Äôs voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice-admiralty. T
he Emma, in ballast, had cleared Auckland on February 20th, and had fe
lt the full force of that earthquake-born tempest which must have heav
ed up from the sea-bottom the horrors that filled men‚Äôs dreams. Once
 more under control, the ship was making good progress when held up by
 the Alert on March 22nd, and I could feel the mate‚Äôs regret as he w
rote of her bombardment and sinking. Of the swarthy cult-fiends on the
 Alert he speaks with significant horror. There was some peculiarly ab
ominable quality about them which made their destruction seem almost a
 duty, and Johansen shews ingenuous wonder at the charge of ruthlessne
ss brought against his party during the proceedings of the court of in
quiry. Then, driven ahead by curiosity in their captured yacht under J
ohansen‚Äôs command, the men sight a great stone pillar sticking out o
f the sea, and in S. Latitude 47¬∞ 9‚Ä≤, W. Longitude 126¬∞ 43‚Ä≤ come
 upon a coast-line of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopean masonry w
hich can be nothing less than the tangible substance of earth‚Äôs supr
eme terror‚Äîthe nightmare corpse-city of R‚Äôlyeh, that was built in 
measureless aeons behind history by the vast, loathsome shapes that se
eped down from the dark stars. There lay great Cthulhu and his hordes,
 hidden in green slimy vaults and sending out at last, after cycles in
calculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the dreams of the sensiti
ve and called imperiously to the faithful to come on a pilgrimage of l
iberation and restoration. All this Johansen did not suspect, but God 
knows he soon saw enough! I suppose that only a single mountain-top, t
he hideous monolith-crowned citadel whereon great Cthulhu was buried, 
actually emerged from the waters. When I think of the extent of all th
at may be brooding down there I almost wish to kill myself forthwith. 
Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping 
Babylon of elder daemons, and must have guessed without guidance that 
it was nothing of this or of any sane planet. Awe at the unbelievable 
size of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying height of the great
 carven monolith, and at the stupefying identity of the colossal statu
es and bas-reliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the Ale
rt, is poignantly visible in every line of the mate‚Äôs frightened des
cription. Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen achieved som
ething very close to it when he spoke of the city; for instead of desc
ribing any definite structure or building, he dwells only on broad imp
ressions of vast angles and stone surfaces‚Äîsurfaces too great to bel
ong to any thing right or proper for this earth, and impious with horr
ible images and hieroglyphs. I mention his talk about angles because i
t suggests something Wilcox had told me of his awful dreams. He had sa
id that the geometry of the dream-place he saw was abnormal, non-Eucli
dean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from ou
rs. Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the 
terrible reality. Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud-bank on
 this monstrous Acropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy
 blocks which could have been no mortal staircase. The very sun of hea
ven seemed distorted when viewed through the polarising miasma welling
 out from this sea-soaked perversion, and twisted menace and suspense 
lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where 
a second glance shewed concavity after the first shewed convexity. Som
ething very like fright had come over all the explorers before anythin
g more definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen. Each would have 
fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only half-h
eartedly that they searched‚Äîvainly, as it proved‚Äîfor some portable
 souvenir to bear away. It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up
 the foot of the monolith and shouted of what he had found. The rest f
ollowed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the 
now familiar squid-dragon bas-relief. It was, Johansen said, like a gr
eat barn-door; and they all felt that it was a door because of the orn
ate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they could not deci
de whether it lay flat like a trap-door or slantwise like an outside c
ellar-door. As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was a
ll wrong. One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horiz
ontal, hence the relative position of everything else seemed phantasma
lly variable. Briden pushed at the stone in several places without res
ult. Then Donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing ea
ch point separately as he went. He climbed interminably along the grot
esque stone moulding‚Äîthat is, one would call it climbing if the thin
g was not after all horizontal‚Äîand the men wondered how any door in 
the universe could be so vast. Then, very softly and slowly, the acre-
great panel began to give inward at the top; and they saw that it was 
balanced. Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the 
jamb and rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recessio
n of the monstrously carven portal. In this phantasy of prismatic dist
ortion it moved anomalously in a diagonal way, so that all the rules o
f matter and perspective seemed upset. The aperture was black with a d
arkness almost material. That tenebrousness was indeed a positive qual
ity; for it obscured such parts of the inner walls as ought to have be
en revealed, and actually burst forth like smoke from its aeon-long im
prisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into the shrunk
en and gibbous sky on flapping membraneous wings. The odour arising fr
om the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the quick-ea
red Hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. Every
one listened, and everyone was listening still when It lumbered slobbe
ringly into sight and gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immensit
y through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poiso
n city of madness. Poor Johansen‚Äôs handwriting almost gave out when 
he wrote of this. Of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks
 two perished of pure fright in that accursed instant. The Thing canno
t be described‚Äîthere is no language for such abysms of shrieking and
 immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all matter, force,
 and cosmic order. A mountain walked or stumbled. God! What wonder tha
t across the earth a great architect went mad, and poor Wilcox raved w
ith fever in that telepathic instant? The Thing of the idols, the gree
n, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to claim his own. The stars w
ere right again, and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design, 
a band of innocent sailors had done by accident. After vigintillions o
f years great Cthulhu was loose again, and ravening for delight. Three
 men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned. God rest
 them, if there be any rest in the universe. They were Donovan, Guerre
ra, and √Öngstrom. Parker slipped as the other three were plunging fre
nziedly over endless vistas of green-crusted rock to the boat, and Joh
ansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldn‚
Äôt have been there; an angle which was acute, but behaved as if it we
re obtuse. So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled de
sperately for the Alert as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down th
e slimy stones and hesitated floundering at the edge of the water. Ste
am had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of
 all hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of
 feverish rushing up and down between wheel and engines to get the Ale
rt under way. Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribab
le scene, she began to churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry 
of that charnel shore that was not of earth the titan Thing from the s
tars slavered and gibbered like Polypheme cursing the fleeing ship of 
Odysseus. Then, bolder than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid gr
easily into the water and began to pursue with vast wave-raising strok
es of cosmic potency. Briden looked back and went mad, laughing shrill
y as he kept on laughing at intervals till death found him one night i
n the cabin whilst Johansen was wandering deliriously. But Johansen ha
d not given out yet. Knowing that the Thing could surely overtake the 
Alert until steam was fully up, he resolved on a desperate chance; and
, setting the engine for full speed, ran lightning-like on deck and re
versed the wheel. There was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisom
e brine, and as the steam mounted higher and higher the brave Norwegia
n drove his vessel head on against the pursuing jelly which rose above
 the unclean froth like the stern of a daemon galleon. The awful squid
-head with writhing feelers came nearly up to the bowsprit of the stur
dy yacht, but Johansen drove on relentlessly. There was a bursting as 
of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a cloven sunfish, a 
stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the chronicler
 would not put on paper. For an instant the ship was befouled by an ac
rid and blinding green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seeth
ing astern; where‚ÄîGod in heaven!‚Äîthe scattered plasticity of that 
nameless sky-spawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful original 
form, whilst its distance widened every second as the Alert gained imp
etus from its mounting steam. That was all. After that Johansen only b
rooded over the idol in the cabin and attended to a few matters of foo
d for himself and the laughing maniac by his side. He did not try to n
avigate after the first bold flight, for the reaction had taken someth
ing out of his soul. Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a gathering
 of the clouds about his consciousness. There is a sense of spectral w
hirling through liquid gulfs of infinity, of dizzying rides through re
eling universes on a comet‚Äôs tail, and of hysterical plunges from th
e pit to the moon and from the moon back again to the pit, all livened
 by a cachinnating chorus of the distorted, hilarious elder gods and t
he green, bat-winged mocking imps of Tartarus. Out of that dream came 
rescue‚Äîthe Vigilant, the vice-admiralty court, the streets of Dunedi
n, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the Egeberg. He c
ould not tell‚Äîthey would think him mad. He would write of what he kn
ew before death came, but his wife must not guess. Death would be a bo
on if only it could blot out the memories. That was the document I rea
d, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside the bas-relief and t
he papers of Professor Angell. With it shall go this record of mine‚Äî
this test of my own sanity, wherein is pieced together that which I ho
pe may never be pieced together again. I have looked upon all that the
 universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the 
flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me. But I do not th
ink my life will be long. As my uncle went, as poor Johansen went, so 
I shall go. I know too much, and the cult still lives. Cthulhu still l
ives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has shielded 
him since the sun was young. His accursed city is sunken once more, fo
r the Vigilant sailed over the spot after the April storm; but his min
isters on earth still bellow and prance and slay around idol-capped mo
noliths in lonely places. He must have been trapped by the sinking whi
lst within his black abyss, or else the world would by now be screamin
g with fright and frenzy. Who knows the end? What has risen may sink, 
and what has sunk may rise. Loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep
, and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men. A time will come
‚Äîbut I must not and cannot think! Let me pray that, if I do not surv
ive this manuscript, my executors may put caution before audacity and 
see that it meets no other eye. 